Article

Authentication Challenges and Solutions in Microservice
Architectures
Constantin Lucian Aldea †

and Razvan Bocu *,†
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Transilvania University of Brasov, 500036 Brasov, Romania;
costel.aldea@unitbv.ro
* Correspondence: razvan.bocu@unitbv.ro
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

Abstract
In this paper, we examine the relevant vulnerabilities and security controls for ensuring the
security of applications built on microservice architectures. Zero Trust security principles
are used to conceptualize and implement a secure ecosystem using Spring Boot security
components and Docker infrastructure. Relevant security controls are analyzed and a proof
of concept was created. The combination of security controls in the Docker environment,
the deployment of these controls, and the analysis of their impact will also be the focus of
this paper.
Keywords: authentication; identity and access management; microservices; cloud security

1. Introduction

Academic Editors: Stefan Fischer and
George Drosatos
Received: 29 September 2025
Revised: 29 October 2025
Accepted: 11 November 2025
Published: 14 November 2025
Citation: Aldea, C.L.; Bocu, R.
Authentication Challenges and
Solutions in Microservice
Architectures. Appl. Sci. 2025, 15,
12088. https://doi.org/10.3390/
app152212088
Copyright: © 2025 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 12088

Zero trust is a fundamental paradigm in information system security, which assumes
that no user or device can be implicitly trusted, even if they are inside the perimeter. Zero
trust applies to users, devices, and microservices. It is about ensuring secure access when
an endpoint, microservice system, or container accesses data.
This paper presents results related to the authentication aspects in distributed systems
and cloud environments when using microservice architectures. Considerations related to
the existing authentication mechanisms and their security issues are addressed. Instructions
are provided to create a sample application that uses Spring Boot security for authentication
in a Docker environment to analyze the endpoint security filters.
APIs are the main channels through which applications communicate with each other,
both in microservice-oriented architectures and in architectures that use external cloud
services. Securing these access points is necessary to prevent unauthorized access to data
and services [1].
OAuth 2.0 is an industry authorization standard that provides authentication
and authorization in the communication flow between services, servers, applications,
and end users.
JSON Web Tokens (JWTs) allow applications to request a token from the IAM service
that grants specific permissions, called claims, without exposing credentials. Because tokens can be restricted to specific uses and have short lifetimes, this model minimizes the
attack surface.
OpenID Connect is an identification layer built on top of OAuth 2.0 that allows the
user’s identity to be verified based on authentication performed by an authorization server
and a basic user profile information to be obtained.

https://doi.org/10.3390/app152212088

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 12088

2 of 23

The authors of paper [2] have implemented and evaluated a proof of concept of
IAMaaS (IAM as a Service). IAM implemented as a cloud service can provide the user with
all the benefits of Security-as-a-Service (SECaaS). In line with the cloud model, the concept
was implemented as a set of virtual machines within a cloud environment.
In paper [3], integrating a service mesh with zero trust, identity and access management (IAM), encryption, and runtime protection creates a unified security architecture for cloud-native systems. The service mesh enforces encrypted and authenticated
communication between services, while zero trust provides continuous verification and
micro-segmentation. Furthermore, IAM ensures granular access control and multi-factor
authentication (MFA), encryption secures data in transit and at rest, and runtime protection
delivers real-time threat detection.
Paper [4] explores the research challenges and potential enablers for user authentication in the IoT realm, and presents a multi-factor authentication concept for IoT as an
alternative to the existing single-factor solutions with limited capabilities. One can consider
a similarity between Internet of Things (IoT) devices and microservices as communication
actors that need to be authenticated.
Study [5] maps security vulnerabilities in microservices to the OWASP Top 10 risks,
highlighting that traditional web application flaws persist and are exacerbated in distributed architectures. Critical issues such as injection attacks, broken authentication,
cross-site scripting (XSS), broken access control, security misconfiguration, sensitive data
exposure, and insufficiently protected APIs are prevalent in microservice environments.
The paper also emphasizes that the increased attack surface and inter-service trust relationships make it harder to mitigate these risks. This necessitates robust measures, such as
strong authentication, encrypted communication, defence-in-depth strategies, and continuous monitoring, to prevent exploitation across multiple services.
The security of a zero-trust network architecture often mitigates external threats while
ignoring internal malicious requests within IoT or microservice clusters. Internal threats can
also lead to data breaches or operational disruptions. To address this, the zero trust principle
of never trust, always verify should be applied to all types of traffic within microservice or
IoT clusters. Token-based access control and blockchain for tracing and forensics have
limitations in mitigating threats. To improve protection against internal threats, the authors
of article [6] propose a novel approach to intra-cluster traffic validation based on API
function control. This involves setting up a verification server and embedding verification
procedures at the entrance of each API function. The verification server examines incoming
requests to decide whether to allow responses.
Spring Security is one such module that provides comprehensive security features
for Spring-based applications. It provides a wide range of authentication and authorization options, including support for various authentication mechanisms such as LDAP,
OAuth, and OpenID [7]. Spring Security also includes features such as user account management, password encryption, and access control to protect web applications against
various types of attacks. CORS (cross-origin resource sharing) is a security measure implemented by browsers that restricts access to server resources by clients from different
origins (i.e., domains, protocols, or ports).
JSON Web Token (JWT) is an open standard (RFC 7519) [8] that introduces a compact and
secure way to transfer information between communication partners in JSON format. A JWT
token consists of three parts: a header, a payload and a signature (header, body, signature).
In paper [9], the JWT penetration testing was performed using the Cross-Site Request
Forgery (CSRF) technique, revealing that an attacker could control a victim’s account and
compromise resources. While JWT is a common standard for user authentication and
authorization, storing tokens in cookies is a vulnerability. To mitigate this risk, HttpOnly

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 12088

3 of 23

cookies can be used. HttpOnly cookies are a special type of cookie that are sent to the
server in HTTP requests and are inaccessible to JavaScript running in the browser, thereby
increasing security. Additionally, the contribution that was reported in article [10] highlights
the relevance of authentication processes in microservice-based architectures.
The contribution presented in book [11] concerns a practical methodology for intelligent college construction and development processes. The solution involves the design
and implementation of proper intrusion detection systems and microservice architecture
models. The authors claim that the resulting microservice-based authentication system
significantly improves the security of the students’ private data while preserving their
pleasant user experience.
The solution in [12] concerns a secure service discovery architecture, which includes
security mechanisms at each phase of the discovery process. This solution encompasses
encryption models and authentication and authorization subsystems to protect microservice
architectures in IoT environments. Furthermore, a mathematical model is presented to
design and implement the necessary security mechanisms. This approach may be sufficient
to mediate the reliable authentication-based microservice architectures relative to the IoT
ecosystem. Additionally, it is relevant to note that the authors of paper [13] reported a
systematic scientific survey on relevant security aspects in microservice architectures.
The OpenRAN initiative specifies an open Radio Access Network (RAN) and provides
operators with fine-grained configuration relative to the radio stack. Thus, O-RAN specifies
new components for the 5G ecosystem, for example, the near-real-time RAN Intelligent
Controller (near-RT RIC), and the related extensible Applications (xApps). The specification
of these components significantly develops the 5G threat surface. Moreover, the shift from
proprietary hardware to virtual environments using Network Functions Virtualization
(NFV) creates further attack vectors. Consequently, the authors of paper [14] reported
the xApp repository function (XRF) framework, which is used to specify and implement
scalable authentication, authorization, and discovery of processes of xApps. The hardening
of XRF microservices is achieved using the Intel Software Guard Extensions (SGX, version
2.25.100.3). Although the isolation of XRF microservices determines adequate logical authentication models, the induced overhead makes this approach computationally inefficient
in certain real-world use case scenarios.
Paper [15] outlines the distinctive security and identity issues posed by agentic AI
within zero-trust microservices, including ephemeral identities, fluctuating workloads,
and machine-to-machine interactions. It also presents a decentralized architecture for
authentication and authorization.
Consequently, this paper presents an efficient microservice-based architecture, which
addresses the identified shortcomings of the existing solutions regarding the authentication
and data security models in microservice-based architectures. In the context of Spring
Security, JWT tokens are often used for authentication and authorization in web applications.
Typically, when a user logs in, a JWT token is generated and sent to the client. The client
then includes the JWT token in subsequent requests to the server, which verifies the token
signature and extracts the user information from the token body to authenticate and
authorize the request.
The contributions proposed in this paper are the following:
•
•

•

Proof of concept for a microservice architecture using an IAM service.
Specification of security controls, aligned with zero trust principles that are suitable
for microservice ecosystems, and the corresponding IAM services (e.g., Spring Boot
and Docker).
The zero trust principles were strengthened in relation to a list of improper design
decisions, which were classified according to their security impact.

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 12088

4 of 23

2. Security Landscape
2.1. Identity and Access Management (IAM)
The role of identity and access management (IAM) is to ensure that an organization’s
users have access to the resources and information they need to do their jobs, facilitating
the implementation of needs-based security and the zero trust model while reducing the
risk of data exposure. IAM is about managing digital identities and access to resources in
an efficient, secure, and compliant manner.
Identity access management (IAM) provides a way to control what users can access,
ensuring that verified entities have the right level of access to the system’s resources.
It involves two steps: identity management and access management. Identity management
ensures that the person attempting to access the system matches the identity they claim
to hold. This is done via logging in to the system and is, nowadays, supplemented with
multi-factor authentication (MFA) for added security. Following this identity check, access
management identifies the right level of access the user holds and ensures that all resources
accessible to that user belong to that access level, in a process called authorization. In summary, IAM systems ensure the correctness of authentication and authorization processes.
Among the main security controls and countermeasures of IAM are the following:
Access control (ensures that only authorized users have access to resources and data based
on authentication and access authorization by implementing access control mechanisms).
Data protection (use of countermeasures to prevent unauthorized access, theft, or compromise of information. This includes data encryption, identity and access management,
and the enforcement of security policies).
Regulatory compliance (compliance with legal requirements and support in the regulatory process).
Monitoring and auditing (auditing of relevant security events and integration with
intrusion detection and prevention systems to recognize and prevent malicious activities).
The architecture and structure of an IAM system is complex and varies depending on
the specific needs of an entity [2]. An IAM system consists of interconnected components that
work together to manage user identities and access to resources. These components include
the following:
-

Directory services—Store and manage identities, assign rights based on policies
(e.g., Active Directory).
Authentication—Confirm identity (passwords, tokens, multi-factor authentication, biometrics).
Authorization—Grant access permissions to authenticated users using role-based rules.
Single Sign-On (SSO)—Access to applications based on a single authentication using
an access token.
Identity Management—Identity lifecycle management, including access creation
and revocation.
Access and monitoring—User access management and monitoring with detection and
reporting of suspicious activity.

2.2. IAM Standards
IAM frameworks unify authentication and authorization system components. For simplicity, an IAM architecture combines identity (user management and authentication) and
access (authorization) management models (see Figure 1) into an ecosystem that fits the
needs of the business/enterprise employing it [16].
To ensure consistency and interoperability, IAM solutions often rely on established
standards and protocols. Protocols used at large for authentication include MFA, OpenID,
SAML, and OAuth. These digital ways of identification reduce the risk of a malicious party

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 12088

5 of 23

gaining access to the internal network of an enterprise and allow, to some degree, to be
used interchangeably.

Figure 1. IAM authentication flow.

This paper introduces a conceptual framework to enhance understanding of identity
and access management (IAM) through the integration of identity management (IdM) and
access control mechanisms (ACMs).
2.3. Zero Trust Architectures
With the high usage of cloud technologies and the shift towards working remotely,
the network location is no longer the primary focus of security measures [17]. As such, Zero
Trust Architectures (ZTAs) focus on protecting resources rather than network segments.
This represents a transition from traditional perimeter-based security architecture, which relies on firewalls to separate internal and external networks and deploys intrusion detection
systems at the network boundary. ZTAs work under the assumption that a malicious party
is already present within the network, or simply put, that the company’s internal network
is just as trustworthy as the external one. This means that there is no notion of implicit trust,
and that each access request needs to be authenticated and authorized, thereby decreasing
the risk authenticated malicious objects pose in PSAs [18]. To this end, implementing a
ZTA follows two major goals: prevention of unauthorized access and granular access control.
2.3.1. Authentication
Authentication mechanisms are based on knowledge, inherence, and/or possession.
Traditional password-protected mechanisms are prime examples of authentication based
on knowledge. However, there are several vulnerabilities associated with them: users
are known to choose very simple passwords [19] and with the number of accounts a
person usually has, choosing strong and unique passwords for each of them is a difficult
task [20]. Inherence factors rely on physical and behavioral patterns of the user, which,
while more difficult to guess compared to knowledge-based ones, are impossible to reset
once compromised, i.e., if the fingerprint of the user is recreated by a malicious party,
any present and future use of the fingerprint for identification purposes is compromised.
Hardware tokens are representative for possession-based authentication methods [21].
Such methods require the user to own a specific piece of hardware, which generates a
dynamic one time password (OTP) required for authentication. However, this is considered
burdensome both for the user and the service provider as it introduces the need to always
carry that device and incurs additional costs. As an alternative, the use of mobile phones
as dedicated hardware devices has been explored; however, this only serves to shift the
vulnerability, as using the corresponding application on the phone also requires the user to
have proven their identity [22].
More recent advances in authentication mechanisms explore the use of digital memory;
however, this approach presents some usability issues as a questionnaire approach is time
consuming (9 s per question) and introduces power drainage issues. This approach also
raises privacy concerns, as identifying a correct answer requires in-depth knowledge of
the user activity. More authentication methods proposed and implemented include facial
recognition using 3D camera technologies, proven vulnerable to 3D-printed heads of a

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 12088

6 of 23

person; breathing gestures; ear canal shape; and EEG signals considered infeasible for
usual usage scenarios. Due to the vulnerabilities or limited applicability of the mentioned
methods, focus has shifted towards multi-factor authentication (MFA). The core idea behind
MFA is that if one of the authentication methods is compromised, the other supplementary
authentication methods required, often of a different type than the main one (knowledge,
inference, or possession), ensure that the risk posed is decreased. It is to be noted that MFA
methods introduce a sense of reliability on an external tool to be able to connect to a service,
or more simply put, if there is no access to the MFA device generating the one time code
(OTC), then the service becomes inaccessible [23].
2.3.2. Authorization
Access control models are used to decide what resources an authenticated user is allowed to access. The standard and four most common authorization models are mandatory
access control (MAC), discretionary access control (DAC), role-based access control (RBAC),
and privileged access management (PAC). Each of these models presents advantages and
disadvantages, allowing a service provider to choose which one fits their requirements best.
MAC assigns labels to resources and entities (users and devices), which represent the
compartment and the classification/clearance. This system is used to describe a resource’s
sensitivity and the compartment of users that could have access to it based on their individual clearance. This system is easy to enforce while providing the granular access
control required by ZTA; however, it achieves compartment security by restricting the
communication of resources. Furthermore, it requires a dedicated structure for managing
security labels, which could be considered an additional organizational burden. On the
other hand, DAC decentralizes the resource management, with the access list of a resource
being set by the owner of that particular resource. While it brings various advantages
with its conceptual simplicity, most notably its responsiveness to business needs, the lack
of centralized oversight can introduce security vulnerabilities as users are given control
over access policies. This is particularly problematic as it could lead to inconsistencies.
For example, to access users’ privileges, every existing access control list must be searched,
and changes to these lists follow the same process.
RBAC is more complex: it requires defining different roles in the organization and
determining what resources individual roles have access to. It is more flexible than the
MAC as it allows the creation of hierarchies by assigning individual users multiple roles
and not restricting access based strictly on the compartment. RBAC policies can be set
consistently within an organization, which allows for a centralized management of roles.
Additionally, if an entity’s role within the organization changes, it is only required that his
role is adjusted accordingly, i.e., removing the old role and assigning the new one. However,
complex deployment scenarios require the creation and management of very specific roles
which can prove challenging and has introduced the need for role engineering. However,
RBAC does not remove the risk of over-privileged users; this is something that PAM
attempts to mitigate. PAM functions on strict ‘least privilege’ access principles, meaning
that entities have limited access to resources, access being restricted to the strictly needed
resources. While this reduces the threat surface, the implementation of PAM is meeting
some resistance due to its high complexity and implementation costs [24].
2.4. Security Frameworks, Protocols and Standards
Spring Security is closely integrated with the Spring ecosystem, including Spring Boot
and Spring MVC. It offers comprehensive support for authentication and authorization,
and features such as CSRF protection, session management, and method-level security. It
also supports OAuth2, SAML and LDAP (Table 1).

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 12088

7 of 23

Table 1. Security frameworks, protocols, and standards.
Name

Framework/
Protocol/Standard

Use For

Key Features

Integration

Spring Security

Framework

Spring-based
enterprise apps

Full-stack security,
OAuth2, OIDC, SAML,
LDAP, JWT support

Deep (Spring)

Apache Shiro

Framework

Lightweight, non-Spring,
or simple apps

Auth, authz, crypto,
session mgmt, basic JWT

Flexible

Keycloak

Framework (IAM)

Centralized IAM,
SSO, federation

SSO, OAuth2, OIDC,
SAML, admin UI,
user mgmt, JWT

Any (external provider)

Java EE Security

Framework

Java EE apps

Declarative security,
container-managed

Java EE

JWT

Standard

Stateless APIs,
microservices

Token-based stateless
auth, easy to use,
widely supported

Any (standard)

Protocol

Delegated authorization,
APIs, SSO

Authorization protocol,
scopes, tokens, supports
SSO, often used
with OIDC

Any (standard)

Protocol/Standard

SSO, federated identity,
user profile

Authentication protocol,
built on OAuth2,
ID tokens,
user info endpoint

Any (standard)

OAuth2

OpenID Connect

Apache Shiro can be used with or without Spring. It integrates well, but is not tied
to any framework. It offers features such as authentication, authorization, cryptography,
and session management. It lacks out-of-the-box support for OAuth2 and SAML.
Keycloak is a standalone identity and access management (IAM) solution. It contains
features for centralized authentication and authorization, single sign-on (SSO), social login,
user federation, role-based access control, an admin UI, OAuth2, OpenID Connect, and
Security Assertion Markup Language (SAML).
JWT is a token format and standard, rather than a complete security framework. It is
commonly used alongside frameworks such as Spring Security, Shiro, and Keycloak for
stateless authentication.
Similarly, OAuth2 is an authorization protocol, not a framework. These frameworks
implement OAuth2 to provide delegated access and single sign-on (SSO).
OpenID Connect (OIDC) is an authentication protocol that builds on the authorization
capabilities of OAuth 2.0. It enables clients, such as web and mobile applications, to verify
users’ identities based on authentication performed by an authorization server and obtain
basic profile information.
Spring Security should be considered when an existing project is based on Spring and
requires advanced, customizable security features. For projects that are simpler, lightweight,
or not based on Spring, Apache Shiro is recommended. Keycloak is suitable for scenarios
requiring centralized identity and access management (IAM), single sign-on (SSO), or when
user management needs to be offloaded. For environments centered on Java EE or JBoss,
the Java EE Security API, JAAS, or PicketLink should be utilized.
Cloud computing is a dynamic, distributed system that offers scalable, cost-effective
and flexible services. This has led to its rapid adoption by organizations. However,
despite its advantages, cloud environments face significant security and privacy challenges, primarily due to multi-tenancy and third-party infrastructure. Robust identity and access management (IAM) is, therefore, essential. The paper [25] surveys the

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 12088

8 of 23

authentication and access control techniques used by cloud providers and their users,
providing comparative insights.
This paper [26] examines the operation of identity and access management (IAM) in
multinational information-sharing environments such as the US Department of Defense
(DoD). It emphasizes the need to strike a balance between facilitating secure information
exchange and protecting against unauthorized access and cyber threats. The study explores
the role of IAM in enabling secure collaboration and supporting zero trust frameworks,
and standardizing authentication and authorization across diverse systems and entities,
including individuals and non-personal entities.
The Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP) identifies what needs to be
secured. The zero trust model, conversely, defines how this should be achieved in dynamic,
distributed environments.
Figure 2 maps the OWASP Top 10, which identifies critical web application security
risks such as injection attacks, broken authentication, exposure of sensitive data, and underprotected APIs. The zero trust principles of verify explicitly, least privilege, assume breach,
micro-segmentation, and encrypt in transit and at rest provide a proactive framework for
countering these risks.

Figure 2. OWASP vs. zero trust in microservice security.

2.5. Multi-Factor Authentication
Multi-factor authentication (MFA) is an access control security mechanism that uses
at least two different authentication methods, such as a password and a dynamically
generated token or biometrics. MFA is a security strategy that increases the level of
protection by introducing additional layers of authentication, even in situations where one
of the authentication keys has been compromised [27].
The banking and finance industry was one of the first to adopt MFA, using hardware
tokens that generate unique access codes. Social media platforms such as Facebook, Twitter
and LinkedIn typically use authentication apps or SMS authentication. Gmail and Outlook
offer MFA options to protect user accounts by generating tokens in authenticator apps.

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 12088

9 of 23

Many security standards and regulations, such as GDPR (General Data Protection
Regulation) and HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act), require the
use of MFA to protect sensitive data. Implementing MFA helps organizations comply with
these regulations and avoid fines or penalties.
Although MFA provides a high level of security, it is subject to attacks such as phishing
(illegitimate messages that allow attackers to obtain the authentication token in addition to
the password), SIM swapping (replacing the SIM card with a copy), man-in-the-middle
(interposing between communicating actors by intercepting or even forging exchanged
messages), social engineering (manipulating users to obtain authentication information
or session tokens), and use of backup codes (bypassing MFA authentication). Some of
the attacks can be avoided by introducing an expiration time for passwords or secrets
exchanged by services or users (Time-Based One-Time Password).

3. Case Study for IAM Framework Using Docker
Using a case study, the security controls of the architecture are analyzed for a practical
IAM framework deployed using Docker containers, enabling modular, scalable, and isolated management of authentication and authorization services within a microservice
environment (Figure 3).

Figure 3. Microservice authentication architecture.

IAM refers to the frameworks, policies, and technologies that ensure the right individuals (or entities) have the appropriate level of access to technological resources at the right
time and for the right reason. The Figure 4 depicts the IAM architectural stack.
By using Spring Boot, one can design and implement Java-based microservices. This
proof of concept analyzes an architecture as shown in Figure 3.

Figure 4. IAM architecture.

Using the Spring Boot Initializr [28], a microservice project is configured by filling in
the fields under Project Metadata and adding the necessary dependencies. In the case
of this project, Apache Maven was chosen because it is a build and management system
suitable for the complexity level of this application. The dependencies added include

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 12088

10 of 23

Spring Web, the driver for the database used (PostgreSQL), Spring Data JPA to enable work
with relational databases, and Lombok to reduce boilerplate code (it makes the code easier
to read and reduces development time).
3.1. Business Scenario
The custom IAM solution can be used in financial, health, energy, and other business
domains. One example of a business process involves IAM, security frameworks, and adaptive policies working together to provide flexible, proactive, and secure protection in a
microservice-based business environment (Figure 4).
User Login—A customer logs in to the web portal. Their authentication request is then
redirected to IAM, where their credentials are verified, and an OIDC-compliant JWT token
is issued.
Accessing Microservices—The user requests their account summary. The web app then
forwards the JSON Web Token (JWT) to the account microservice, which uses Spring
Security to validate the token and authorize access.
Adaptive IAM Policy—The ecosystem has implemented adaptive IAM policies. If the
system detects unusual behavior, such as a login from a new country or rapid, high-value
transactions, it will trigger additional verification steps, such as multi-factor authentication
(MFA) or temporary access restrictions.
Machine Learning-Based Detection—The platform uses machine learning models to
analyze user behavior across microservices. If an anomaly is detected (e.g., a fraudulent
pattern), the IAM system can automatically restrict access, notify administrators, and request further verification from the user.
Audit and Compliance—For compliance and auditing purposes, all access and policy
changes are logged, thereby ensuring that the system meets all regulatory requirements.
3.2. Improper Design Decisions
The distributed nature of microservices increases security risks due to multiple endpoints and inter-service communication.
The most widely recommended solutions are the existing standards and patterns, such
as OAuth, TLS, and JSON Web Tokens (JWTs), and API gateways [29].
Refactoring is required to mitigate security risks arising from improper design decisions in microservice-based applications.
Table 2 shows the correspondence between improper design decisions and their
security countermeasures [29], and the zero trust principle that encompasses the countermeasures when applied.
Table 2. Security improper design decision → refactorings → zero trust alignment for microservices.
Improper Design Decision

Refactoring

Zero Trust Principle

Affected Property

Missing access control

Use OAuth 2.0

Verify explicitly
(token validation per call),
Least privilege (scopes)

Confidentiality

Exposed microservices

Add API Gateway

Assume breach
(single choke point),
Micro-segmentation
& policy enforcement,
Verify explicitly

Confidentiality

Excessive privileges

Apply Least
Privilege Principle

Least privilege (minimized
permissions), Assume breach
(reduced blast radius)

Confidentiality, Integrity

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 12088

11 of 23

Table 2. Cont.
Improper Design Decision

Refactoring

Zero Trust Principle

Affected Property

Custom cryptography

Use Established
Encryption Libraries

Assume breach
(reduce crypto flaws),
Encrypt in transit/at rest
(standards-based crypto)

Confidentiality,
Integrity, Authenticity

Unencrypted sensitive data

Encrypt Data at Rest

Encrypt at rest,
Assume breach
(data unreadable if accessed)

Confidentiality,
Integrity, Authenticity

Encrypt Secrets at Rest;
avoid storing in code/env

Verify explicitly (workload
identity to fetch secrets),
Least privilege (scoped
access), Assume breach
(no plaintext secrets)

Confidentiality,
Integrity, Authenticity

Insecure inter-service
communication

Use Mutual TLS (mTLS)

Verify explicitly
(service identity),
Encrypt in transit,
Micro-segmentation
(authenticated
east–west traffic)

Confidentiality,
Integrity, Authenticity

Unauth. traffic

Use mTLS + OpenID Connect
(OIDC)

Verify explicitly
(user & service identity per
request), Encrypt in transit

Authenticity

SSO via API Gateway + OIDC

Verify explicitly
(centralized auth),
Assume breach
(consistent controls),
Least privilege
(token scopes/claims)

Authenticity

Decentralized Authorization
(e.g., JWT at each service)

Verify explicitly
(enforce at every hop),
Micro-segmentation
(policy close to resource),
Least privilege
(fine-grained checks)

Authenticity

Hardcoded secrets

Multiple authentication points

Centralized-only
authorization

3.3. Docker
Docker provides portability through application containerization, speed through rapid
boot time, scalability through efficient orchestration, and consistency across environments
to enable continuous software delivery.
The docker-compose.yaml and Docker compose files are created with the necessary
settings to run the application and database in separate containers.The environment variables are defined, and then the application.properties file is updated with the settings for
the database connection, the PostgreSQL driver, and the dialect used by Hibernate. The log
level is also set to debug to make it easier to find the source of any errors or failed tests.
Unlike MFA (multi-factor authentication), which relies primarily on user-provided
credentials and additional verification factors for access control, Docker enables containerized environments where authentication layers are enforced at the infrastructure level.
By integrating IAM as a service, API access controls can be efficiently managed through
role-based access control (RBAC), ensuring consistent and scalable security policies and
reducing dependence on human-based authentication. Additionally, the use of JSON Web
Tokens (JWTs) in a Dockerized microservice architecture contributes to a security framework that supports stateless authentication, enabling efficient and scalable access control,
while cross-origin resource sharing (CORS) policies ensure that only authorized requests

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 12088

12 of 23

from trusted origins are processed. When combined with the zero-trust model, which assumes no implicit trust even within internal networks and enforces continuous verification,
Docker may enhance security for distributed applications, including IoT environments
where traditional MFA presents limitations.
One of the notable benefits of using Docker for security is its capability to implement
single sign-on (SSO) while maintaining strict access controls through IAM policies. Unlike
traditional MFA, which often requires multiple verification steps for each session, SSO
within a containerized environment is enforced through identity providers that validate access at the API gateway level [30]. Spring Security, commonly used for securing Java-based
applications, can be integrated with Dockerized applications to streamline authentication
and authorization. Furthermore, Docker enhances security by enforcing policy-driven
authentication through container orchestration tools such as Kubernetes, which integrates
IAM at the cluster level to prevent unauthorized access. This may reduce the need for
repetitive MFA steps and contribute to a more centralized and manageable security model.
By incorporating Docker into IAM services, organizations can centralize identity control
and enforce access policies consistently across various platforms, reducing security risks associated with lost authentication devices, such as mobile phones, and ensuring continuous
protection through infrastructure-level identity verification.
Requiring a secondary authentication device is one of the methods that enhance security in MFA; however, this additional requirement can present challenges for users, such
as delays in accessing their devices or difficulties when the secondary device is unavailable. This can lead to frustration, particularly in situations where quick authentication
is needed but external verification steps disrupt the authentication process. A user needing access only to their laptop for work may still have to be forced to use their personal
phone for authentication. This added step can slow access and reduce efficiency, especially
in trusted environments. Docker addresses these security concerns by implementing an
identification layer at the application level through containerized identity management.
This is achieved by integrating IAM solutions directly into containerized applications,
ensuring that authentication and authorization mechanisms are handled at the service
level rather than depending primarily on user credentials. Through API gateways and
encrypted service-to-service authentication, Docker enforces identity verification dynamically, allowing microservices to authenticate each other using secure tokens instead of
static credentials. This method minimizes human intervention, reduces attack surfaces
associated with compromised user accounts, and strengthens application-layer security.
Instead, security policies can be dynamically enforced through encrypted service-to-service
authentication using API gateways and container-specific IAM settings. This approach
enhances security by ensuring strict authentication and authorization mechanisms without excessive reliance on user credentials. Environment variables are securely defined
and managed within containerized environments, ensuring that sensitive credentials and
configuration details remain protected from unauthorized access and potential security
breaches. As a result, Docker contributes to a more resilient security framework in containerized applications by strengthening authentication and authorization mechanisms at
the infrastructure level.
Dockerfile
A Dockerfile configuration has been defined to facilitate the building and execution of
a Spring Boot application utilizing newest Java and PostgreSQL versions. The build process
is optimized by omitting test execution, and environment variables are used to enable
flexible configuration across different deployment environments. These variables also

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 12088

13 of 23

ensure the PostgreSQL database is properly available and configured, which is essential for
the application’s functionality.
Key sections in defining a Dockerfile include specifying the base image (e.g., OpenJDK with Java 21), setting the working directory, copying project files, installing Maven,
compiling the application, deploying the JAR, exposing ports (e.g., 8080 for Spring Boot,
5433 for PostgreSQL), configuring environment variables, and declaring the entry point to
run the application.
Sample Docker compose file: The Docker compose file can be used to define a
microservice-oriented (or other) architecture for Figure 3. Environment variables are
used to initialize services without modifying the microservice source code. The use of
volumes within the container definition enables data persistence, allowing applications to
persistently store and retrieve data. In addition, using the depends_on option ensures that
the database is available before the application starts, minimizing connectivity issues.
To ensure the security of Docker and its containers [31], it is necessary to implement
the following security policy rules: continuous updates, avoidance of docker.sock exposure,
use of unprivileged users to prevent privilege escalation attacks, maximum limitation of
a container’s functionality by applying need-to-know and zero trust principles, blocking
privilege escalation, configuration of read-only volumes, and use of Docker secrets.
3.4. Authentication and Authorization
To create the authentication microservice, the first step is to add the security dependencies to the pom.xml file and then create the internal architecture based on the Spring
Boot stack (Figure 5).
Next, the user entity is created, extending the user details object provided by Spring
Security and using the override annotation to override the default properties of this object.
The necessary annotations are also added to this entity to be able to use getters and setters
and to define the name of the table in the database.

Figure 5. Spring context dependencies for authentication microservice.

The name of the table with users avoids conflicts with the default PostgreSQL table. Another important detail is the definition of a primary key id using the @Id and
@GeneratedValue annotations.
Also in this phase, the types package is added and a new enum called Role is created,
which is used in the user entity together with the @Enumerated (EnumType.STRING)
annotation.
Then the UserRepository interface is declared which extends JpaRepository.
A security package is created to manage the security options.

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 12088

14 of 23

The access token is included in each request-response pair. The refresh token is
securely stored in a database. The flow continues if either the access token or the refresh
token is valid. If the access token is no longer valid, but the refresh token is, it is used to
generate a new access token.
If both tokens are invalid, or if a CSRF token cannot be found, the authentication
process ends and a standard response with an http status code of 403 is sent to the client.
Filter packet: A custom filter that extends OncePerRequestFilter can be implemented
by overriding the doFilterInternal() method. The JwtAuthenticationFilter, annotated with
@Component and @RequiredArgsConstructor, is registered as a Spring bean. The filter
checks for an authorization header starting with Bearer, extracts the token, and retrieves the
user’s email via the JwtService for further authentication processing.
Service packet: The handling of token operations is implemented using a dedicated
JwtService class, which is annotated with @Service. It extracts and validates JWTs using
a signing key to ensure their integrity and authenticity. The token is generated using the
user’s email address and a creation timestamp, and has a 24 h expiry period. Validation
checks for expiry. The signing key is derived from a securely generated AES-256-CBC
secret. In the authentication filter, if the user is not authenticated, their details are retrieved
using the email address embedded in the token.
Config Packet: Contains the filter and service packets.
The application configuration class is created and is annotated with a configuration
and requires a constructor.
A user details service is implemented, which handles the user details on the basis of
an e-mail or generates a user not found error message.
Incoming requests to the Spring-based microservice are first processed by a security
filter chain. This chain configures CSRF protection and CORS policies, and access rules for
exposed routes.
If the access and refresh tokens are invalid, but also if a CSRF token is not found,
the authentication process is terminated, and a standard HTTP status 403 response is sent
to the client.
When a request passes through these steps, the credentials are retrieved from it and
checked to see if they are in the server database. This process involves obtaining a provider
for the authentication manager, which uses an authentication token, an object created using
the credentials, and a password encoder that we specify to determine whether or not a user
exists in the database. This token is also associated with the security context, which is a
central class for storing authentication information about the current user.
When a user attempts to access a protected resource, Spring Security generates a
unique CSRF token and stores it in the user’s session. This token is then included in all
subsequent requests to the server as a header. When a request is received, Spring Security
compares the token in the header with the one stored in the user’s session. If they match,
the request can proceed. If they do not match, the request is rejected, thus preventing
CSRF attacks.
3.5. Zero Trust Principles Mapped to Spring Boot and Docker Configurations
The zero trust principles are reflected in the Spring Boot and Docker functionalities,
Table 3, offering the security controls needed to secure microservice architectures and
enable secure identity and access management (IAM) implementations.
The zero trust principles studied and analyzed in the current paper (see also Table 2)
and their corresponding security controls in Spring Boot and Docker are presented in the
following sections.

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 12088

15 of 23

Table 3. Zero trust principles applied to Spring Boot and Docker configurations.

Zero Trust Principle

Spring Boot Configuration

Docker Configuration

Verify Explicitly

Enforce Security Filter Chain;
JWT validation; CSRF & CORS policies;
OIDC integration

API Gateway auth; Docker secrets;
Read-only mounts; Health checks

Least Privilege

RBAC/ABAC; Scoped short-lived JWTs;
Data scoping; Deny-by-default rules

Non-root containers; Drop capabilities;
Network segmentation; Minimal ports

Assume Breach

Token expiry/refresh; Audit logging;
Step-up auth on anomalies;
Fail-closed defaults

Immutable images; Continuous image
scanning; Key rotation; Egress allow-lists

Micro-Segmentation

API Gateway policies; mTLS for
service-to-service;
Separate auth/data flows

Dedicated Docker networks;
Sidecar proxies; Network policies

Encrypt in Transit & At Rest

HTTPS/TLS; Key rotation; DB encryption;
Strong password hashing

TLS for inter-container traffic;
Docker secrets; Encrypted volumes

3.5.1. Verify Explicitly
The verify explicitly principle ensures strong and ongoing authentication and authorization for each request for users, services, and devices. The Table 4 provides a list of related
security controls.
Table 4. Verify explicitly security controls.

Spring Boot

◦
◦

◦

◦

Apply the security filter chain to
every request.
Use a dedicated authentication filter
to validate JWTs (issuer, audience,
signature and clock skew).
Where applicable, enable CSRF
protection and implement strict
CORS policies for origins, methods
and headers.
Integrate OIDC for identity
management, per-request
authorization and centralized
audit logs.

Docker Infrastructure Configurations

◦

◦
◦

Route all traffic via the API
Gateway/Ingress for the purposes of
authentication, authorization
and throttling.
Use Docker secrets for keys
and tokens.
Use read-only mounts and health
checks to ensure that requests are not
served until the authentication
services are ready.

3.5.2. Least Privilege
The least privilege principle states that access should be granted only to the minimum
necessary, and that short-lived, scoped tokens should be preferred. The Table 5 provides a
list of corresponding security controls.
3.5.3. Assume Breach
The principle assume breach rule is that systems are designed so that compromising
one component does not result in a wider breach. This involves protecting keys and data,
and adding choke points. The related security controls are given in Table 6.

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 12088

16 of 23

Table 5. Least privilege security controls.

Spring Boot

◦

◦

◦

RBAC/ABAC (method and
endpoint security, and
fine-grained claims).
Scoped, short-lived JSON Web
Tokens (JWTs) with minimal claims
and narrow audiences.
Data scoping at the repository and
service layers, and principal-based
rate limits and deny-by-default.

Docker Infrastructure Configurations

◦

◦
◦
◦

Non-root users, capability drops and
limit processes actions
(seccomp/AppArmor).
Minimal ports and
container permissions.
Per-service database users.
Network segmentation to required
dependencies only.

Table 6. Assume breach security controls.

Spring Boot

◦
◦
◦

Token expiry and refresh, and
immediate revocation.
Structured audit trails with
integrity protections.
Step-up authentication in the event of
anomalies, with fail-closed defaults
and minimal error leakage.

Docker Infrastructure Configurations

◦
◦

◦
◦

Read-only root file system and
immutable images.
Continuous scanning of images and
Software Bill of Materials (SBOM),
and rotation of keys and secrets.
Egress allow-lists.
A kill switch and auto-containment are
available for suspected compromise.

3.5.4. Micro-Segmentation
The micro-segmentation and policy enforcement principle is used to enforce policies. These
policies are applied to each service or segment. Examples include the API gateway, sidecars,
and service mesh. Relevant security controls are listed in Table 7.
Table 7. Micro-segmentation security and policy enforcement security controls.

Spring Boot

◦

◦
◦

Policy enforcement at the API
gateway (routes, scopes,
and client identity).
Mutual TLS (mTLS) between
services and service identities.
Authentication flows are
separated from data flows across
bounded contexts.

Docker Infrastructure Configurations

◦
◦
◦

Use dedicated Docker networks
for each context.
Where applicable, use a sidecar or
proxy for policy and telemetry.
Implement network policies and
allow lists for paths.

3.5.5. Encrypt in Transit and at Rest
The encrypt in transit and at rest principle states that data must be encrypted both in
transit and at rest. Use TLS/mTLS for traffic, and standards-based encryption for stored
data and secrets. Relevant security controls are listed in Table 8.
3.6. Performance Benchmarking
Performance is directly influenced by the number and quality of the security controls
implemented. Security layers introduce additional processing, such as token validation
and user context loading, resulting in higher latency. Additionally, enabling and extending the security measurement increases CPU usage due to cryptographic operations,
session management, and policy enforcement. Furthermore, security frameworks consume

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 12088

17 of 23

more memory to store user sessions, tokens, and access control data. The performance
measurements were conducted on a local machine with an Intel Core i7 processor and
32 GB of RAM.
Table 8. Encrypt in transit and at rest security controls.

Spring Boot

◦

◦
◦

Use HTTPS/TLS with HTTP Strict
Transport Security (HSTS) and
strong ciphers.
Rotate and protect TLS and
signing keys.
Encrypt sensitive fields at
database/application level and use
strong password hashing.

Docker Infrastructure Configurations

◦
◦

◦

Use TLS for communication
between containers.
Secrets can be managed either
via Docker Secrets or
via an external vault.
We also offer encrypted volumes,
backing storage, and host disks.

Although security layers enhance protection, they also introduce measurable overhead in
terms of latency, CPU usage, and memory usage. These trade-offs must be taken into account
when designing scalable microservices, particularly in high-performance environments.
Deviating from these cybersecurity measures can create vulnerabilities in the security architecture that malicious attackers may exploit. Such situations can have serious
consequences for the company and the individuals involved.
The auth-performance-test container from Figure 6 was implemented and ran performance tests against the authentication service. It is defined in Docker and depends on
the following other containers: the main authentication microservice being tested (authservice), sample-service, database-service (additional services involved in test scenarios
for service comparison and authenticated calls), and the database container that provides
persistent storage for the services.

Figure 6. Test container flow.

The performance test container carries out a wide range of authentication and service
interaction calls, including user registration and login scenarios, direct service requests,
and authenticated requests with both valid and invalid tokens in order to measure system
responsiveness and integration behavior.

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 12088

18 of 23

When the auth-performance-test container is started, Docker ensures that all the
dependent services are running. The test container then interacts with these services to
simulate real-world scenarios and measure performance metrics. The results are saved to
the results directory (Figure 7).
Two categories of performance test were conducted to evaluate the robustness and
efficiency of the authentication and service components. The authentication performance
tests comprised 1000 successful authentication requests, including 500 user registrations
and 500 logins, and 1000 failed authentication attempts to simulate various failure scenarios. These tests also measured the performance of JWT token validation. Meanwhile,
the Service Comparison Tests assessed the impact of authentication on service performance
by executing 2000 unauthenticated service calls and 2000 authenticated calls using JWT
tokens. Additionally, 500 requests with invalid tokens were tested to evaluate error handling and security. The results enabled a comparative analysis of response times and
authentication overhead.
As Table 9 shows, analyzing authentication performance reveals notable differences
between successful logins and failed authentication attempts. Successful logins have an
average response time of 197 ms, which is slower than the 23–34 ms range for failed
attempts. Failed authentications, whether due to invalid credentials, non-existent users,
or malformed requests, are usually rejected early in the process, resulting in faster response
times. These findings emphasize the efficiency of failure handling mechanisms and the
additional costs associated with secure login operations.

Figure 7. Instrumentation points in login flow.

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 12088

19 of 23

Table 9. Comparison of response times for successful logins vs. failed authentication attempts.

Scenario

Count

Avg Time (ms)

P50 (ms)

P95 (ms)

P99 (ms)

Successful Logins

500

197

187

270

320

Invalid Credentials
Non-existent Users
Malformed Requests

400
300
200

34
26
23

30
22
19

53
41
46

95
49
52

The response time percentiles (P50, P95, and P99) offer useful information about the
system’s performance in various authentication scenarios (see Figure 8). For successful
logins, the P50 value of 187 ms indicates that half of the requests are completed within
this time. Moreover, the P95 and P99 values (270 ms and 320 ms, respectively) reveal a
noticeable tail in the latency distribution. This variability in processing times is likely due
to backend operations such as credential verification and JWT token generation.
In contrast, failed authentication attempts (invalid credentials, non-existent users,
and malformed requests) exhibit significantly lower and more consistent response times.
For instance, invalid credentials have a P50 of 30 ms and a P99 of 95 ms, while nonexistent users and malformed requests show even tighter distributions, with P99 values
of 49 ms and 52 ms, respectively. These narrow ranges suggest that failures are quickly
detected and handled without extensive processing, indicating efficient short-circuiting in
the authentication logic.

Figure 8. Authentication response time comparison.

In summary, the percentile data highlights that the system is optimized for the rapid
detection of failures, while successful authentications, albeit slower, remain within acceptable performance thresholds.
Table 10 shows that, for the Sample Service, for example, authenticated requests demonstrated better performance than direct calls, with an average response time of 23 ms compared to 32 ms. This improvement was consistent across percentiles, with P50, P95, and P99
values all being lower in the authenticated scenario. This suggests that authentication may
enable optimizations such as caching or streamlined processing. In contrast, the Database
Service showed consistent performance for both access types, with an average response
time of 13 ms, and minimal variation in the P95 and P99 values. These results imply
that the Database Service is highly optimized and unaffected by authentication overhead.
However, further investigation is needed to establish why unauthenticated calls are slower
for the Sample Service. This could be due to differences in request handling or resource
access patterns.

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 12088

20 of 23

Table 10. Performance metrics for direct vs. authenticated service calls.

Service Type

Service

Count

Avg Time

P50

P95

P99

Direct (No Auth)

sample
db

1000
1000

32
13

25
12

75
21

168
52

Authenticated (JWT)

sample
db

1000
1000

23
13

18
12

42
22

61
27

Furthermore, an empirical approach to enhancing performance evaluation is to use
Prometheus, an open-source system that collects and stores time-series metrics from applications and infrastructure, to gather data from defined instrumentation points, and visualize
these metrics through Grafana dashboards, which provide interactive and customizable
views (Figure 9). This setup enables real-time monitoring of login performance and error rates.

Figure 9. Visualize metrics flow.

4. Conclusions
The interconnection of microservices, with the use of security controls to authenticate
communicating entities (users or automated services) is necessary to protect data. Implementing authentication and authorization strategies, using API gateways, and adopting
monitoring practices ensure that interactions between applications remain secure.
Using the case study and scientific literature, we analyzed how zero trust principles
unify and enforce critical countermeasures against security flaws in microservices, particularly in the IAM subsystems of a microservice ecosystem. This ensures that all access,
interactions, and data flows are continuously verified and operate with the least possible
privilege, making the system resilient to breaches.
Nevertheless, for the proof-of-concept implementation on which the paper is based,
the performance of the authentication process was evaluated using 500 successful logins
and 1000 failed attempts. The latency percentiles (P50, P95, and P99) and average response
times were reported. Successful logins averaged 197 ms (P95: 270 ms; P99: 320 ms), whereas
failed attempts averaged 23–34 ms, demonstrating efficient error handling.
The emergence of quantum technologies and AI agents implies the need for continuous improvement of authentication methods and underlying encryption algorithms,
and the creation of architectures that can prevent denial-of-service attacks in their early
stages. Based on the concept of microservice-oriented architectures analyzed in the paper, issues that may affect the security of distributed systems are identified, and possible
countermeasures are discussed.
Future research could examine how machine learning-based intrusion detection systems could be used to improve security in microservice architectures. Additionally, behavior analysis techniques could be investigated to identify and respond to unusual user or
system activity. Another approach to proactive security management involves adaptive
IAM policies that dynamically adjust access controls in response to detected anomalies.

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 12088

21 of 23

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, C.L.A. and R.B.; methodology, C.L.A. and R.B.; software,
C.L.A. and R.B.; validation, C.L.A.; formal analysis, R.B.; investigation, C.L.A.; resources, C.L.A. and
R.B.; data curation, R.B.; writing—original draft preparation, C.L.A. and R.B.; writing—review and
editing, R.B. and C.L.A.; visualization, C.L.A. and R.B.; supervision, R.B. All authors have read and
agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: The raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will be made
available by the authors on request.
Acknowledgments: Some English phrases corrected with https://www.deepl.com/en/write (accessed on 25 September 2025).
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:
ACM
CORS
CSRF
DAC
DoD
GDPR
HIPAA
HSTS
IAM
IAMaaS
IdM
IoT
JAAS
JWT
LDAP
MAC
MFA
mTLS
OAuth
OIDC
OTC
OWASP
PAC
PSA
RBAC
SIM
SAML
SBOM
SECaaS
SGX
SMS
SSO
ZT
ZTA

Access Control Mechanism
Cross-Origin Resource Sharing
Cross-Site Request Forgery
Discretionary Access Control
US Department of Defense
General Data Protection Regulation
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
HTTP Strict Transport Security
Identity and Access Management
IAM as a Service
Identity management
Internet of Things
Java Authentication and Authorization Service
JSON Web Tokens
Lightweight Directory Access Protocol
Mandatory Access Control
Multi-Factor Authentication
mutual Transport Layer Security
Open Authorization
OpenID Connect
One Time Code
Open Worldwide Application Security Project
Privileged Access Management
Perimeter-based Security Architecture
Role-Based Access Control
Subscriber Identity Module
Security Assertion Markup Language
Software Bill of Materials
Security as a Service
Intel Software Guard Extensions
Short Message Service
Single Sign-On
Zero Trust
Zero Trust Architecture

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 12088

22 of 23

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

7.
8.
9.

10.
11.

12.
13.
14.

15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.

Nasab, A.R.; Shahin, M.; Raviz, S.A.H.; Liang, P.; Mashmool, A.; Lenarduzzi, V. An empirical study of security practices for
microservices systems. J. Syst. Softw. 2023, 198, 111563. [CrossRef]
Sharma, D.H.; Dhote, C.; Potey, M.M. Identity and access management as security-as-a-service from clouds. Procedia Comput. Sci.
2016, 79, 170–174. [CrossRef]
Arif, T.; Jo, B.; Park, J.H. A Comprehensive Survey of Privacy-Enhancing and Trust-Centric Cloud-Native Security Techniques
Against Cyber Threats. Sensors 2025, 25, 2350. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Ometov, A.; Petrov, V.; Bezzateev, S.; Andreev, S.; Koucheryavy, Y.; Gerla, M. Challenges of multi-factor authentication for
securing advanced IoT applications. IEEE Netw. 2019, 33, 82–88. [CrossRef]
Mateus-Coelho, N.; Cruz-Cunha, M.; Ferreira, L.G. Security in microservices architectures. Procedia Comput. Sci. 2021,
181, 1225–1236. [CrossRef]
Xu, S.; Yin, M.; Hu, T.; Li, J.; Li, H.; Deng, K. Traffic Verification Based on API Function Control in IIoT Service Cluster.
In Proceedings of the 2023 IEEE 11th International Conference on Information, Communication and Networks (ICICN), Xi’an,
China, 10–13 August 2023; IEEE: New York, NY, USA, 2023; pp. 347–352.
Chatterjee, A.; Prinz, A. Applying spring security framework with KeyCloak-based OAuth2 to protect microservice architecture
APIs: A case study. Sensors 2022, 22, 1703. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
RFC 7519; JSON Web Token (JWT). Available online: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7519 (accessed on
10 November 2025).
Darmawan, I.; Karim, A.P.A.; Rahmatulloh, A.; Gunawan, R.; Pramesti, D. Json web token penetration testing on cookie storage
with csrf techniques. In Proceedings of the 2021 International Conference Advancement in Data Science, E-Learning and
Information Systems (ICADEIS), Nusa Dua, Indonesia, 13–14 October 2021; IEEE: New York, NY, USA, 2021; pp. 1–5.
Chulhyung, L.; Fiona Kim, H.; Lee Bong, G. A Systematic Literature Review on the Strategic Shift to Cloud ERP: Leveraging
Microservice Architecture and MSPs for Resilience and Agility. Electronics 2024, 13, 2885. [CrossRef]
Pu, Z. Smart Campus Business Flow Reconstruction Algorithm Based on Unified Identity Authentication and Microservices.
In Proceedings of the ICSETPSD 2023: The First International Conference on Science, Engineering and Technology Practices for
Sustainable Development, ICSETPSD 2023, Coimbatore, India, 17–18 November 2023.
Bilal, O.; Raza, A.; Rehman Khan, S.U.; Ali, G. A Contemporary Secure Microservices Discovery Architecture with Service Tags
for Smart City Infrastructures. VFAST Trans. Softw. Eng. 2024, 12, 79–92. [CrossRef]
El Akhdar, A.; Baidada, C.; Kartit, A.; Hanine, M.; Osorio Garcia, C.; Garcia Lara, R.; Ashraf, I. Exploring the potential of
microservices in internet of things: A systematic review of security and prospects. Sensors 2024, 24, 6771. [CrossRef]
Atalay, T.; Maitra, S.; Stojadinovic, D.; Stavrou, A.; Wang, H. An OpenRAN Security Framework for Scalable Authentication,
Authorization, and Discovery of xApps With Isolated Critical Services. IEEE Trans. Dependable Secur. Comput. 2025, 22, 2873–2890.
[CrossRef]
Palavali, D.R. Agentic AI for Self-Sovereign Identity: A Decentralized Zero Trust Framework for Autonomous Microservices.
Int. J. Comput. Math. Ideas IJCMI 2025, 17, 17347–17360.
Nahar, K.; Gill, A.Q. Integrated identity and access management metamodel and pattern system for secure enterprise architecture.
Data Knowl. Eng. 2022, 140, 102038. [CrossRef]
Stafford, V. Zero Trust Architecture; NIST Special Publication 800-207; NIST: Gaithersburg, MD, USA, 2020.
He, Y.; Huang, D.; Chen, L.; Ni, Y.; Ma, X. A survey on zero trust architecture: Challenges and future trends. Wirel. Commun. Mob.
Comput. 2022, 2022, 6476274. [CrossRef]
Lopez, J.; Oppliger, R.; Pernul, G. Authentication and authorization infrastructures (AAIs): A comparative survey. Comput. Secur.
2004, 23, 578–590. [CrossRef]
Shah, S.W.; Kanhere, S.S. Recent trends in user authentication—A survey. IEEE Access 2019, 7, 112505–112519. [CrossRef]
Eckert, C. IT-Sicherheit 7. A. Konzepte–Verfahren–Protokolle; Oldenbourg Wissenschaftsverlag: Munchen, Germany, 2012.
Gunson, N.; Marshall, D.; Morton, H.; Jack, M. User perceptions of security and usability of single-factor and two-factor
authentication in automated telephone banking. Comput. Secur. 2011, 30, 208–220. [CrossRef]
Syed, N.F.; Shah, S.W.; Shaghaghi, A.; Anwar, A.; Baig, Z.; Doss, R. Zero trust architecture (zta): A comprehensive survey.
IEEE Access 2022, 10, 57143–57179. [CrossRef]
Aldea, C.L. Data Security Elements in Computer Networks; Transilvania University of Brasov Publishing House: Brasov, Romania, 2010.
Indu, I.; Anand, P.R.; Bhaskar, V. Identity and access management in cloud environment: Mechanisms and challenges. Eng. Sci.
Technol. Int. J. 2018, 21, 574–588. [CrossRef]
Calhoun, Z.; Maribojoc, P.; Selzer, N.; Procopi, L.; Bezzo, N.; Fleming, C. Analysis of Identity and Access Management alternatives
for a multinational information-sharing environment. In Proceedings of the 2017 Systems and Information Engineering Design
Symposium (SIEDS), Charlottesville, VA, USA, 28 April 2017. [CrossRef]

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 12088

27.

28.
29.
30.

31.

23 of 23

Ibrokhimov, S.; Hui, K.L.; Al-Absi, A.A.; Lee, H.J.; Sain, M. Multi-factor authentication in cyber physical system: A state
of art survey. In Proceedings of the 2019 21st International Conference on Advanced Communication Technology (ICACT),
Pyeongchang, Republic of Korea, 17–20 February 2019; IEEE: New York, NY, USA, 2019; pp. 279–284.
Spring Boot Building an Application with Spring Boot. 2025. Available online: https://spring.io/guides/gs/spring-boot
(accessed on 12 October 2024).
Ponce, F.; Soldani, J.; Astudillo, H.; Brogi, A. Smells and refactorings for microservices security: A multivocal literature review.
J. Syst. Softw. 2022, 192, 111393. [CrossRef]
Tourchi Moghaddam, M.; Edal Pedersen, A.; Lillebroe Bolding, W.W.; Worm, T. A Performant and Secure Single Sign-On
System Using Microservices. In Proceedings of the 38th ACM/SIGAPP Symposium on Applied Computing, Tallinn, Estonia,
27–31 March 2023; pp. 1516–1519.
Woschek, M. Owasp Cheat Sheets; OWASP Foundation: Wilmington, DE, USA, 2015; pp. 1–315.

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

