Degree project in Computer Science and Engineering
Second cycle, 30 credits

Selecting a service mesh
implementation for managing
microservices
ASAWARI JOSHI

Stockholm, Sweden 2022

Selecting a service mesh
implementation for managing
microservices
ASAWARI JOSHI

Master’s Programme, ICT Innovation, 120 credits
Date: October 17, 2022
Supervisors: Jaume Anguera Peris, Erfan Yousefi
Examiner: Viktoria Fodor
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Host company: Infor(Sweden) AB
Swedish title: Välja en service mesh-implementering för hantering
av mikrotjänster
Swedish subtitle: En jämförelse mellan service mesh-teknologier
för valda parametrar

© 2022

Asawari Joshi

Abstract

Abstract
Microservice architectures are the base of modern cloud applications. With
the adoption of microservices, application teams manage to reduce codebase
complexity and write more modular services that can run inter-dependently.
Despite all the advantages offered by microservices over monolithic
architectures, they introduce additional complexities, such as handling interservice communication, ensuring security, introducing traceability, and
achieving acceptable performance. To manage all these microservices, the
orchestrator tool Kubernetes has shown promising results, but it is not
sufficient to tackle all the cross-cutting concerns of the applications. With
more complex architectures, it becomes difficult to troubleshoot and trace
inter-service application programming interface calls. For this purpose, the
service mesh technology emerged and is being introduced in many companies.
There are different implementations available for service mesh, with
some being more compatible with specific cloud providers than others. The
selection of an adequate service mesh shapes the entire application deployment
process. If chosen wrongly, it might introduce further complexities or
performance losses. This thesis investigates ways to make this decision
more efficiently. It takes into account the company’s needs of service
mesh and compares implementations to meet performance expectations with
minimal deployment efforts. Specially, we perform different testing scenarios
to compare AWS cloud specific, AWS App Mesh with most widely used,
Istio service mesh. The outcome suggests that AWS App Mesh performs
consistently for all cases with acceptable latency ranges, but, Istio outperforms
AWS App Mesh under standard conditions, such as high but manageable
request load on the application. In addition, Istio can achieve the same
deployment with less lines of code as compared to that of AWS App Mesh.
On the other hand, resource utilization by these service meshes is found to
be a non-conclusive factor for selecting the service mesh implementation.
With these outcomes, application teams can make more well-informed
decisions to run the production-grade workloads with an efficient service mesh
implementation.

Keywords
Service mesh, Istio, AWS App Mesh, Performance testing, Fortio, Latency
distribution, Microservice architecture

i

Abstract

ii

Sammanfattning

Sammanfattning
Mikroservicearkitekturer är basen för moderna containerapplikationer. Med
antagandet
av mikrotjänster lyckas applikationsteam minska kodbaskomplexiteten och
skriva fler modulära tjänster som kan köras beroende av varandra. Trots
alla fördelar som mikrotjänster erbjuder framför monolitiska arkitekturer,
introducerar de ytterligare komplexitet, såsom kommunikation mellan tjänster,
säkerhet, spårbarhet och prestanda. För att hantera alla dessa mikrotjänster
har orkestreringsverktyget Kubernetes visat lovande resultat, men det är inte
tillräckligt för att ta itu med alla övergripande problem med applikationerna.
Med mer komplexa arkitekturer blir det svårt att felsöka och få synlighet
i mikrotjänster. För detta ändamål växte servicemesh-tekniken fram och
introduceras i många företag.
Det finns olika implementeringar tillgängliga för servicemesh, där vissa
är mer kompatibla med specifika molnleverantörer än andra. Valet av ett
adekvat servicenät formar hela applikationsdistributionsprocessen. Om det
väljs fel kan det leda till ytterligare komplexitet eller prestandaförluster.
Denna avhandling undersöker sätt att göra detta beslut mer effektivt. Den
tar hänsyn till företagets behov av servicenät och jämför implementeringar
för att möta prestandaförväntningar med minimala implementeringsinsatser.
Speciellt genomför vi olika scenarier för prestandatestning för att jämföra
AWS App Mesh med Istio servicemesh. Resultatet tyder på att AWS App
Mesh presterar konsekvent för alla fall med acceptabla latensintervall, men
Istio överträffar AWS App Mesh under standardförhållanden, såsom hög
men hanterbar förfrågningsbelastning på applikationen. Istio kan uppnå
samma distribution med färre rader kod jämfört med AWS App Mesh.
Resursutnyttjande av dessa tjänstenät har visat sig vara en icke avgörande
faktor för val av tjänstenätimplementering. Med dessa utfall kan företaget där
detta examensarbete genomförs, Infor (Sweden) AB, fatta mer välinformerade
beslut för att driva de produktionsmässiga arbetsbelastningarna med en
effektiv implementering av servicenät.

Nyckelord
service mesh, Istio, AWS App Mesh, Performance testing, Fortio, Latency
distribution, Microservice architecture

iii

Sammanfattning

iv

Acknowledgments

Acknowledgments
I would first like to thank my industrial supervisor at Infor, where I conducted
my research, Erfan Yousefi. He helped me understand the need of this research
and also contributed to resolving several configuration and coding issues. He
welcomed me in his team at the company, and supported me throughout the
research process. I would also like to thank my thesis supervisor, Jaume
Anguera Peris at KTH for guiding me to design and structure the research.
He tremendously helped in organizing the contents of the thesis and answered
all my queries with helpful insights. I am thankful for all the help I received
from my team at Infor during my research process. Furthermore, I would like
to thank my examiner, Professor Viktoria Fodor for helping me understand the
selection criteria for the project and giving her valuable feedback from time to
time.
Stockholm, October 2022
Asawari Joshi

v

Acknowledgments

vi

CONTENTS

Contents
1

Introduction
1.1 Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.2 Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.3 Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.4 Benefits, Ethics and Sustainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.5 Research Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.6 Delimitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.7 Structure of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1
1
3
4
4
5
6
6

2

Background
2.1 Microservice architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.1.1 From monolithic to microservices . . . . . . . . . . .
2.1.2 Containers and the need for orchestration . . . . . . .
2.2 Kubernetes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2.1 Kubernetes Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2.2 Kubernetes Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3 Service Mesh emergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3.1 Challenges in Microservices . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3.2 Service Mesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.4 Selection of service mesh implementations . . . . . . . . . . .
2.4.1 Meshes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.4.2 Selection Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.5 Istio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.5.1 Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.5.2 Core functionalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.6 AWS App Mesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.6.1 Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.6.2 Available and selected features . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9
9
9
12
13
13
14
16
16
17
22
22
23
24
24
26
28
28
30

vii

Contents

2.7

Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
2.7.1 Performance benchmark and resource utilization . . . 32

3

Method and implementation
3.1 Selection of tools and technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 Application and cluster details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3 Application deployment on Istio and AWS App Mesh . . . . .
3.4 Performance testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

41
41
43
44
50

4

Results and Analysis

53

5

Discussion

65

6

Conclusions and Future work
6.1 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.2 Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.3 Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.4 Reflections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

69
69
70
70
71

A Selection criteria

83

B Sample cost calculations for service mesh solutions

85

C Listings

87

viii

LIST OF FIGURES

List of Figures
2.1.1 Process to move from a monolith to a microservice
architecture [1, 2] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2.1 Kubernetes architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3.1 Different Service mesh implementations [3] . . . . . . . . . .
2.3.2 Service Mesh Architecture [4, 2] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.5.1 Istio service mesh architecture [5, 6] . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.6.1 AWS App mesh components(CRDs) [7, 8] . . . . . . . . . . .

12
15
19
20
27
30

3.2.1 Application without any mesh [9] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3.1 Application Bookinfo with Istio service mesh . . . . . . . . .
3.3.2 AWS App Mesh: Service reviews-v1 architecture [10] . . . . .
3.3.3 Application Bookinfo with AWS App Mesh [10] . . . . . . . .

44
48
49
49

4.0.1 Istio and AWS App Mesh: Pre-benchmarking test . . . . . . .
4.0.2 Maximum QPS supported by Istio and AWS App Mesh . . . .
4.0.3 Istio: Latency distribution graph when QPS is 0 . . . . . . . .
4.0.4 AWS App Mesh: Latency distribution graph when QPS is 0 . .
4.0.5 Actual QPS values supported by Istio and AWS App Mesh
when QPS is 743 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.0.6 Istio: Latency when QPS = 743, number of connections = 32
and the test running time is 5 minutes per sample (total 30
samples collected) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.0.7 AWS App Mesh: Latency when QPS = 743, number of
connections = 32 and the test is run for 5 minutes per samples
(total 30 samples collected) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.0.8 Data plane: CPU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.0.9 Control plane: CPU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.0.10Data plane: Memory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.0.11Control plane: Memory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

55
56
57
57
58

59

59
61
62
62
63

ix

LIST OF TABLES

List of Tables
2.4.1 Support for features per service mesh implementation . . . . .
2.7.1 Statistics collected from graph approximations found in [11]:
Latency (P99) in milliseconds, CPU in millicores, and
Memory in GB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.7.2 Logarithmic latency comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.7.3 Test data for different service mesh implementations. The
number of connections for each test is 32. . . . . . . . . . . .
2.7.4 Comparison of latency-related statistics, setup details, and test
scenario details collected from references . . . . . . . . . . .
2.7.5 Comparison of CPU and memory statistics collected from
[12, 13] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

25

33
35
36
37
39

3.1.1 Selected tools and technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
3.2.1 Cluster and application set up details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.0.1 Initial test data for Istio and AWS App Mesh . . . . . . . . . . 54
4.0.2 Comparison based on gathered data and analysis . . . . . . . . 63

x

List of acronyms and abbreviations

List of acronyms and abbreviations
AWS Amazon Web Services
CI/CD Continuous Integration/Continuous Deployment
CRD Custom Resource Definitions
CRE container runtime engine
EKS Elastic Kubernetes Service
GCP Google Cloud Platform
JWT Java Web Token
NLB Network LoadBalancer
QPS Queries Per Second
RPS Requests Per Second
VPC Virtual Private Cloud

xi

List of acronyms and abbreviations

xii

Introduction

Chapter 1
Introduction
.

This section explores the idea and the necessity of a service mesh
in detail. It also conducts a comparative research to identify the most
suitable implementation of service mesh technology for production-grade
environments.

1.1

Background

In recent years, companies have shown a major tendency towards cloud
computing. The move demands changes in the way applications are designed.
With infrastructural changes, the deployed application needs to utilize the
benefits that the cloud provides. That means, essentially developing a
strategy to redesign the legacy and complex codebases into manageable
and smaller deployment units. In modern terms, it is important to move
from monolithic architectures to microservice architectures to fully adopt a
cloud-native approach wherever the decomposition of existing applications is
possible.
Monolithic Architectures are frameworks that combine all functions of
an application in a single application unit that is easy to develop, test,
deploy and scale [14]. Due to this simplistic nature, it provides low
architectural complexity, although it reduces the application’s reusability
and renders a large and complex codebase. To mitigate these limitations,
Microservices Architectures leverage a service-oriented architecture style to
support applications that contain a collection of loosely coupled software

1

Introduction

services [14]. Microservices are distributed in nature and allow multiple
components to be developed and deployed independently, allowing code
reusability, faster release cycles, and a maintainable codebase. Docker and
Kubernetes are the frameworks that leverage microservice architectures to
reduce the gap between the development and deployment process of complex
applications. They deliver microservices in a fast and efficient manner by
packaging code in readily deployable service units.
The distributed nature of microservices leads us to reflect on the idealistic
assumption that the underlying network connecting those services is reliable,
highly available, has infinite bandwidth, and exhibits no data loss. Kubernetes
provides several features to ensure application reliability and high availability.
It also offers bare minimum support for inter-service communication along
with service discovery. Yet, despite these in-built features and mechanisms,
there are additional requirements commonly requested by development and/or
deployment teams, such as:
1. Provide effective, fast, secure, available, and reliable communication
between services distributed across the cluster.
2. Monitor and capture every message exchanged between services.
3. Measure the health of service communication requests and collect lowlevel metrics.
4. Achieve more visibility into system communication.
In a production-grade environment, the number of microservices could
be enormous, and in case of system failure or performance problems, it is
difficult to isolate the cause of the problem or find a particular microservice
slowing down the system. Hence, we need a new layer managing inter-service
communication called service mesh.
A service mesh provides observability, security, and resilience in the
application architecture. It also provides the logic to monitor, control,
and manage not only microservices but the underlying infrastructure by
intercepting service requests. Service mesh supports a network-policy-driven
approach, allowing controlled traffic flow based on policy definitions in face of
constantly changing network topologies. Moreover, it makes the development
process easy and fast as it does not require the developer to focus on interservice communication, circuit breaking, and timeout implementation at the
application level.

2

Introduction

1.2

Problem

This thesis focuses on driving cloud-native initiatives to move from monolithic
to microservice-based architectures.
To support the production-grade
deployment of microservices, Kubernetes is being used as the orchestration
tool. As the legacy codebase is large and complex, it is essential to move to
the microservices slowly and efficiently. Kubernetes alone is not sufficient
to promise all the cross-cutting concerns such as routing, encryption, security,
and metrics collection. Therefore, Information Technology firms are choosing
service mesh technologies to ensure reliability, security, and observability
regarding the microservices deployed in production. A service mesh has a
variety of open source and cloud-specific implementations, so it is important
to understand the organization-specific use-cases and when choosing a suitable
service mesh. In this study, performance is considered the main factor when
it comes to selecting the service mesh.
Istio, Linkerd, and Consul are the most commonly used open-source
service meshes. Istio is used by leading companies in the IT industry like
Google, IBM, and Lyft, whereas Linkerd is backed by CNCF. Istio is more
configurable and provides a rich set of features at the cost of higher response
times. For example, features such as circuit breaking, delay injections,
and mesh expansion are not supported in Linkerd. Linkerd provides better
performance in terms of response times and resource utilization as it uses a
lightweight likerd2-proxy. Consul is simple and is expected to be similar to
Linkerd in terms of performance, but does not have preconfigured integrations
with open-source monitoring and observability tools such as Prometheus and
Grafana. Overall, Istio stood out as the logical choice for it being configurable,
open-source, and well-supported.
As per the official service mesh documentation, selecting an app mesh has
long-term effects on the application deployment, and it is important to compare
different implementations, keeping an essential feature-set for a specific use
case in mind. At the time of writing, Amazon Web Services (AWS) is the
base of all the services provided to the customers at Infor. Hence, a service
mesh well integrated with AWS infrastructure, known as App Mesh, is a valid
candidate. Therefore, we decided to focus on comparing AWS App Mesh and
Istio for performance, ease of implementation, and cost-efficiency.
The three sub-questions mentioned in the SQs below need to be answered
to conclusively answer the main research question RQ1:
• RQ1: Which service mesh technology is better suited for Infor’s

3

Introduction

production-grade microservice architecture?
• SQ1: Which service mesh candidate is easier to configure and maintain?
• SQ2: Which service mesh candidate provides better performance in
terms of response latency and request throughput?
• SQ3: Which service mesh candidate consumes lower resources with the
possibility to maximize resource utilization?
• SQ4: What are the cost implications of service mesh candidates?

1.3

Purpose

The purpose of this project is to identify the implementation of service
mesh that would be most useful for production-grade environments, involving
Kubernetes as the orchestration tool for container management. The objective
of the thesis is to analyse AWS App Mesh and Istio for their implementation
efforts, performance, and resource utilization. The decision of this choice is
made based on a literature survey, implementation overview, and an analytical
comparison between the performance of the sample application deployed
using the two meshes. The research will also gain some insights into the
monitoring solutions provided by both the meshes.

1.4

Benefits, Ethics and Sustainability

Data centers are considered the backbone of entire data-providing networks in
cloud platforms, but they are responsible for roughly 1% of global electricity
consumption [15]. Leading cloud providers such as Google Cloud Platform
(GCP), AWS, and Azure plan to have carbon-neutral energy running data
centres in the coming 5-10 years [16]. As the implementation in the thesis
mainly involves the AWS cloud, the carbon footprint implication of the
selected cloud is worth mentioning. As per the official AWS documentation
[17], it is 88% more energy-efficient than the on-premises data centres.
Virtualization in data centres causes higher energy consumption as
compared to non-virtualized environments. In a Kubernetes cluster with
service mesh implementation enabled, the number of resources running
in the virtualized environment almost doubles, resulting in more resource

4

Introduction

consumption than in a cluster without any service mesh. On the other hand, if
the service mesh is implemented, it might even save energy because network
function libraries in the business logic code would be unnecessary. Thus,
from a sustainability point of view, it is important to analyse the capabilities
provided by different service mesh architectures to save energy consumption
in the implementation.
In the AWS App Mesh implementation, the control plane does not consume
as many computing resources as in the Istio mesh. Additionally, in AWS App
Mesh, the control plane can be launched in a serverless service, known as AWS
Fargate, where the deployed containers do not require dedicated resources.
This can reduce power consumption, as resources shall be used only when
necessary and not be dedicated or reserved.
From an ethics perspective, data about Infor’s product or internal
architectural decisions have not been exposed in the research. The research
implementation would include open source tools and technologies such as
Istio, Prometheus, Grafana, and locust as well as App Mesh, a paid service
provided by AWS, paid by the organization. Data collected from the paid
service is not deemed confidential and hence can be used for competitive
analysis.

1.5

Research Methodology

This research involves both qualitative and quantitative methodologies for the
comparative analysis of service mesh implementations. Qualitative research
deals with understanding implementation efforts for deploying an application
to selected service meshes. For example, monitoring the deployed application
with the help of service mesh, helps us understand which service mesh
provides better visibility and traceability into the application. An exploratory
approach is conducted during performance testing on selected technologies,
as there are a variety of tools and technologies available for conducting such
type of testing. Parameters such as success rate, response time, request
throughput, and resource utilization have been chosen for quantitative analysis.
Relevant data is collected using Prometheus and plotted for more readability
with Grafana. The research refers to not only books and research papers
but also online forums, official websites of relevant technologies as well as
YouTube channels. Analytical research has been conducted to compare the
costs involved in deployment across chosen service meshes. The research has
been conducted with Infor’s production-grade application needs in mind. A

5

Introduction

sample microservice-based application is selected, following the microservice
architecture model Infor uses for some of its applications. The choice of cloud
is made based on the current infrastructural choices made by the organisation.
The chosen application is then deployed on identical Kubernetes clusters in
the AWS cloud, with one cluster enabled with Istio mesh while the other,
with AWS App Mesh. Implementation efforts are subjective, as familiarity
with a specific technology makes implementation easier than non-familiar
technologies. Keeping this in mind, efforts are compared only concerning the
number of steps required to perform certain operations during deployments.
For example, a certain service mesh functionality can be enabled with a single
change in a file in one implementation, whereas the other needs more changes.
The architectural details and implementation theories are explained in relevant
sections for the chosen service meshes.

1.6

Delimitations

The thesis involves a competitive analysis of Istio and AWS App Mesh based
on selected parameters deemed important for deployment considerations. It
does not include all features supported by these technologies. Instead, only a
set of parameters have been chosen for the comparison, and the research may
not contribute to the selection decision if the parameters are changed. For
example, mechanisms for implementing retry and timeout logic in the mesh are
not compared, whereas performance metrics such as application throughput,
error rates, CPU, and Memory resource utilization have been compared to
make a conclusive decision in the research. The aim of the research is not
to prove one technology better than the other in all aspects, but only in a
limited number of aspects and selected scenarios. The research uses a sample
application for performance testing, and the numbers could be different for
other applications or other scenarios. Moreover, the project does not include
a deep dive into all the service mesh implementations due to time constraints.
The selected meshes have been picked based on the company’s infrastructural
choices and the capabilities of the meshes.

1.7

Structure of the thesis

Chapter 1 gives an overview of the thesis, including the motivation and
brief background to set the required context for the following sections.

6

Introduction

Chapter 2 includes a detailed understanding of microservice architecture and
container orchestration, followed by an introduction to selected service-mesh
technologies for the thesis. It also discusses existing works related to the
service mesh and the performance benchmarking area. Chapter 3 gives
a brief idea of chosen tools and technologies, as well as a description of
the implementation details for selected service meshes. Later, it highlights
the application deployment and procedure to conduct performance testing
on selected service meshes. It then briefs about the cost implications of
selected technologies. Chapter 4 describes the results drawn from the analysis
of gathered data and qualitative aspects such as implementation efforts and
traceability of the deployed application. Chapter 5 summarizes different
concepts derived from literature research and conducted experiments. In
Chapter 6, all the important findings of the thesis are gathered, and a possible
future work is suggested based on the identified limitations.

7

Introduction

8

Background

Chapter 2
Background
2.1

Microservice architecture

To understand the microservice architecture, it is important to study the
traditional application architecture, that is, monolith. Both architectures have
benefits and limitations, although, microservices is considered a modern
architecture that overcomes major limitations present in the monolithic
architecture. In either case, selecting which architecture to implement is a
vital decision for application’s lifecycle. The following sections discuss the
fundamentals of each architecture in detail.

2.1.1

From monolithic to microservices

The
traditional
approach
to
design applications involved monolithic architectures. Monolith architectures
demand designing, developing, and deploying an entire application as a
single unit. Specially, all components of the application such as the
database, business logic, background processes, and remaining functional
components are developed in a single deployable unit [18, 19]. Thus, software
as a whole is delivered in one single application. This architecture has
some advantages, such as simplification of developer workflow, deployment
architecture, troubleshooting, and monitoring. Monolithic architecture makes
code reuse an easy and simple decision, as well as being traditional, more tried,
and tested [20, 21]. Therefore, it is more trusted than the newer architectural
patterns [21].

9

Background

As teams grow in size, the disadvantages of monolith architectures begin
to surface. Components in a monolith are tightly coupled, making it hard to
change one component without causing failures in another. Monoliths have
large codebases, which are challenging to comprehend for newcomers to the
team. Before making a small change related to a specific component in the
codebase, the newcomers need to go through all the components in detail to
avoid causing failures. It is difficult to draw boundaries between components
in a monolith, hence hard to delegate ownership to individuals in the team.
It does not follow the single responsibility principle. The problem described
as delivery contention gives rise to confusion about the ownership of specific
lines of code in the monolith and slows down the decision-making process
[22]. For every small change, the entire application needs to be redeployed,
which causes more deployments and restart times [21, 23]. As the impact
of a small change is not fully understood, it leads to enormous amounts of
manual testing. A small bug in a single component can bring down the entire
application and can cause unavailability in the application until the bug is
fixed, making the application unreliable. Scaling is a challenge in monoliths,
as different components may have conflicting resource demands. Continuous
and faster release cycles are hard to achieve, and adapting to new languages or
development frameworks is an expensive and time-consuming decision [21].
On the contrary, microservice architectures divide an application
into a collection of highly maintainable, testable, loosely-coupled, and
independently deployable services [1]. They are modelled around business
capabilities and communicate with one another via Application Programming
Interfaces(APIs) or network endpoints [20, 21]. Figure 2.1.1 shows the
transition from monolith architectures to microservice architectures.
Microservice architectures have a variety of advantages. Application
components are robust, independent, and consequently scalable, as they are
considered individual microservices. For developers and quality analysts,
it is easy to understand the relevant microservices rather than the entire
application codebase. This results in newcomers spending less time
in onboarding activities. Microservices follow the single responsibility
principle, making a clear separation of concerns for individual developers
or small teams owning a specific microservice. An individual microservicespecific change causes redeployment of the concerned microservice and not
the entire application, thus ensuring partial or complete availability. As
microservices are independent of one another, they can be redeployed and
scaled easily. It is easy to isolate faults, making microservices reliable.
Microservices architectures are language or framework independent. This

10

Background

allows developers or teams to use different technology stacks per component
in the application. Continuous deployment and automation are promoted in
microservice architectures.
Despite all the mentioned advantages of microservices over monolith
architectures, microservices can introduce added complexities to the
application. As microservices work essentially in a distributed system,
they need to take into account the commonly described fallacies of the
distributed systems [20, 24]. They need to implement an inter-process
communication mechanism and also address the latencies, retry, and timeout
mechanisms in case of API call failures. They also need to ensure the
availability and reliability of the underlying network. Testing strategies are
complex, as dependencies of the microservices need to be launched to ensure
integrity between them. Deployment, scaling, and monitoring bring additional
complexities, such as dependency management, service discovery mechanism,
and defining trigger points for scaling automation [25].
Adapting to modern microservice-based architecture is not an easy
decision, as it highly affects the development, testing, and release process of
the application. It is important to identify and ensure the need to migrate from
monolith to microservice architecture. If certain needs are not fulfilled in the
monolithic architecture, moving to microservices would be a viable option.
For a small team owning an entire application, it may not be a wise decision
to drop the current architecture for microservices, as it is a financially and
time-wise costly decision to restructure the application with limited resources.
Whereas, for largely growing teams, microservices could be the most reliable
choice for moving applications to the cloud. Improving robustness, scaling
for increasing customer demands, introducing a new programming language
for a component, and decreasing system downtown can be possible reasons to
consider moving to a microservice architecture [20].
Infor is a leading brand in Enterprise Resource Planning(ERP) systems
and has been providing managed services to its customers for more than
20 years with on-premises systems. In recent years, Infor has moved its
infrastructure to the cloud to provide more reliable and efficient service with
faster updates. This change goes hand-in-hand with restructuring the existing
monolith applications to microservice architecture to fully utilize the cloud
platform.

11

Background

Figure 2.1.1: Process to move from a monolith to a microservice architecture
[1, 2]

2.1.2

Containers and the need for orchestration

Virtualization is a backbone of cloud computing technology and modern cloud
platforms such as Azure, GCP, and AWS are reliant on this technology [26, 27].
Virtual machines allow application isolation, efficient resource utilization, and
increased application availability. Despite the advantages of virtual machines
over physical servers, they can cause resource overhead [28].
A container is a lightweight virtualized process that requires less startup
time, thereby making it more resource-efficient, easily portable, and highly
scalable [29, 30]. It is a new, and more modern form of virtualization,
called operating-system-level virtualization, as it divides user space to isolate
multiple processes [31]. By doing so, it optimizes resource consumption
on a single host machine. A microservice defines the design of software,
whereas a container defines the packaging of the software. A Container
can run a microservice with all dependencies, such as libraries, executables,
configuration files, and binaries packed inside [29]. To utilize both
microservices, and container architectures, it is beneficial to use them in
combination with each other.
A host machine requires a container runtime engine (CRE) to run
containers. Docker is a widely used open-source CRE that allows the
development of microservices in portable LXC containers to automate faster

12

Background

deployments [32, 33]. It runs each container in a separate namespace, isolating
it from the underlying operating system, thereby enabling multi-tenancy
between applications [32]. Docker manages the container designing and
deployment process, but it does not have the central management capabilities
required to administer multi-container applications. For instance, if an
application has multiple interdependent microservices running as containers,
a central system is essential to handle the communication, scaling, and
availability of microservices [34].

2.2

Kubernetes

Kubernetes is a container orchestration tool, originally designed by Google, to
allow faster, modular, and efficient development of applications [35]. Its main
responsibility is to orchestrate containers by managing clusters. Specifically,
it places containers on the available machines in the cluster to optimize
resource utilization, and it replaces unhealthy or dead containers to provide
high availability. It also allows service discovery to communicate with other
microservices running in the cluster. Kubernetes is compatible and can be
easily integrated with modern cloud platforms, such as AWS, GCP, and Azure
[28, 35]. To understand the advantages and limitations of Kubernetes, it
is essential to deep dive into the technology, its components, and relevant
architectures. Figure 2.2.1 depicts Kubernetes architecture in detail.

2.2.1

Kubernetes Concepts

This section discusses important components of Kubernetes.
Other
components such as volumes, stateful, secrets, etc. have not been included
as they are not relevant to the scope of this thesis.
• A cluster is a collection of hosts, networks, and storage resources
required to run Kubernetes. The entire architecture may contain one
or multiple clusters. A cluster has one or several masters and worker
nodes to run application workloads.
• The master node comprises the control plane. The control plane
has three components, namely, the scheduler, the API-server, and
the controller manager. The master node maintains the placement,
availability, and events of the pods. There can be multiple masters in
the cluster to make it highly available.

13

Background

• The worker node makes up the data plane. It includes Kubelet and
Kube-proxy components. It runs pods and is controlled by the master
node(s) [36].
• A pod is the smallest deployable artefact and contains one or multiple
containers. A single microservice is deployed in a single container.
Containers within a pod share the same network namespace(IP address
and port space) and communicate with each other over standard interprocess communication protocol or localhost [35].
• A replica is the number of pods of a specific microservice running in
the cluster. Replica controllers or replica sets promise to always have a
specific number of pods running in the cluster. An unhealthy or crashed
container is identified and replaced to maintain the replicas.
• A Service represents a set of pods to expose functionality or a
microservice to users. They have different types to control the access
to internal resources from outside entities and/or other microservices.
They can be load-balanced by Kubernetes or developers themselves.
• A namespace is a virtual cluster. A single cluster can have multiple
namespaces. Microservices across namespaces can communicate only
via public interfaces. It provides better separation between multiple
stacks of microservices deployed on a single cluster.

2.2.2

Kubernetes Components

As discussed earlier, the master and worker nodes in a cluster have several
components that conduct the core functionalities of container orchestration.
The master is responsible for planning cluster operations, managing the
cluster state, monitoring the nodes and containers, and scheduling pods on
nodes. Information about pods, such as the time of deployment, pod-node
association, and cluster state, is stored on a highly available key-value store
known as the Etcd cluster. The scheduler identifies the right node to place the
pods on based on the capacity of the worker node, the resource requirements
of the container, several constraints such as taints and toleration, and nodeaffinity rules. There are different types of controller-managers available on
the cluster for various purposes. Node-controllers manage the on-boarding of
new nodes, handling unhealthy, not-ready, or destroyed nodes. The replication
controller ensures that the specified number of containers is always running in

14

Background

the cluster by replacing a terminated pod or adding/removing replicas to match
the desired replication count. Kube-API server is the primary management
component of the cluster. It is responsible for orchestrating all operations in the
cluster, and it is exposed to external users and systems to perform management
operations on the cluster.
Every worker node has a component called Kubelet that is responsible
for conducting actual workloads assigned to it by the master. It registers
the node to the cluster and gathers information about the node it runs on,
and the status of the pods running on the same node. The Kube-API server
fetches continuous reports about the gathered information to keep the Master
node updated with the latest resource and workload-related information.
Microservices running across different Worker nodes need to communicate
with each other. A component called Kube-proxy service manages this
communication by enforcing certain access rules to reach one node from
another. All these components can be hosted as containers in the Kubernetes
ecosystem. To support running containers, Kubernetes requires a CRE such
as Docker, Containerd, or Rckt.

Figure 2.2.1: Kubernetes architecture
Kubernetes has become one of the most widely known and used
orchestration tools across different cloud platforms. Istio and AWS App Mesh

15

Background

support Kubernetes as the underlying architecture.

2.3

Service Mesh emergence

2.3.1

Challenges in Microservices

Microservices are modern technology and have limited research available.
Especially, very few articles and research papers have been written on
empirical research on the topic [30]. Most of them have been written since
Docker was released in 2014. Therefore, it is important to understand
the limitations and problems with the technology before adopting it. As
shown in [37], cloud practitioners describe a variety of challenges in
microservice architectures. Some of them are networking between containers,
troubleshooting and tracing an issue, maintaining numerous repositories, or
finding a logical boundary between microservices [37]. Each microservice has
its data, and maintaining consistency across all data sources is a challenge [30].
As the field is relatively new, it is hard to build expertise in the area. Not all
organizations are ready to adopt microservice architecture. Many traditional
organizations find it hard to adopt microservices and DevOps technologies,
as they do not focus on the readiness of the organization for the move
[30]. Design, security, communication, increased operational complexity, and
testing are some commonly known challenges of microservice architecture
[38].
In modern applications, there are thousands of microservices running
with multiple replicas of each microservice in a constantly changing network
topology [20]. This dynamic nature of the infrastructure can cause concerns,
such as packet loss, increased response time, and faulty responses. In this
case, it becomes difficult to trace the root cause of an issue, making debugging
process hard without proper traceability [39]. A simple API can involve
several calls across microservices, thus increasing the number of network
calls. As one involves more network dependencies in the application, the
idealistic assumptions about the underlying network such as being reliable,
secure, and with a non-changing topology or without latency start becoming
invalid [24, 40, 41, 42]. Specially, if a malicious entity compromised a
single microservice, each API call has to be secure and should not let the
malicious entity get control over the entire application [43]. To address the
security concerns, authorization policies of the application need to be granular
and implemented per microservice [43]. Since microservices can come and

16

Background

go in the network, a robust service discovery mechanism is necessary to
keep the cluster state updated at all times. It is important to ensure the
availability of APIs exposed to the consumers [39]. To ensure fault tolerance
and reliability, developers need to implement retry and timeout mechanisms as
well as rate-limiting across the microservices. This divides their focus between
functionality and operational logic. Microservices need error handling,
fault injection, and resilience tests to confirm application resilience. As
the microservice behaviour depends on inter-service communication, traffic
control between microservice becomes an essential need. It is critical to
identify the boundary between the microservice capabilities and its runtime
requirements [44]. It gives a clear understanding of what features should be
centrally applied to all microservices and avoids the repetition of code.
Overall, observability, traceability, reliability, security, service discovery,
fault tolerance,
resilience,
traffic control,
traffic shaping,
and the unclear separation between functional and operational requirements
are the complexities identified in the microservice architecture.

2.3.2

Service Mesh

All the identified shortcomings of microservices architecture caused the
emergence of a new technology called service mesh. Arguably, William
Morgan first defined service mesh in 2017 as follows: “A service mesh is a
dedicated infrastructure layer for handling service-to-service communication.
It’s responsible for the reliable delivery of requests through the complex
topology of services that comprise a modern, cloud-native application. In
practice, the service mesh’s implementation is an array of lightweight network
proxies deployed alongside microservices, without the applications needing to
be aware.”[45]
The purpose of a service mesh is to decentralize the networking
infrastructure between microservices in your microservice [46, 2]. This
decoupling recognizes the boundary between functionality and operational
logic of the microservice. With the emergence of the service mesh, developers
can solely focus on writing the code for the functional requirements of a
microservice. They do not have to implement operational logic such as
routing control, retry and timeout mechanisms, or handling authentication
and authorization. Service mesh adds resilience, security, and observability
features to the application stack [45].
Service mesh is a communication layer that sits on top of microservices.
This layer can be implemented in three different ways, namely, as libraries,

17

Background

node agents, or sidecars, as shown in Figure 2.3.1. In the library approach,
each microservice maintains a copy of the library designed to provide all
functionalities of the service mesh. This was the most straightforward and
original approach taken by companies pioneering cloud-native architecture
adoption. Twitter’s Finagle, Netflix’s Hystrix, and Google’s Stubby are some
examples of the initial implementation of the library approach [47, 48, 45].
The advantage is that the resource allocation is handled by the OS as the
library runs as code inside the microservice. The trust boundary is small, as
the microservice trusts the code running in it and not some other entity in the
network [49]. In the case of polyglot applications, this approach involves more
work, as multilanguage libraries require more work to replicate functionalities
in different languages. Also this approach is not compatible if third-party
applications are used, as injection of libraries is a challenge in that case [50].
It is hard to maintain libraries as version control issues may surface in multicluster implementations [3]. It also causes some performance issues as the
library code is embedded in the microservice.
Node agents are an alternative approach that is easier to maintain. It
requires an agent running on each node in the cluster as a daemon. This
approach is language-independent and serves multiple microservices running
on a single node, but requires infrastructure-wide coordination to deploy the
agent [49]. It is cheaper to distribute one copy to each node rather than to every
single pod, which makes it a performance-friendly approach [3]. It uses the
work resource-sharing principle where it allocates resources to microservices
on a request basis. Although this provides more efficiency than the library
model, it opens room for resource abuse [3, 49]. A single microservice can hog
up as many resources as it requests, starving other microservices. Developers
have to maintain the logic on the application level to handle resource sharing
efficiently. It also creates a single point of failure for all pods running on a
single node [51]. If the node agent is lost, the communication to all pods
on the node is lost. Linkerd deployments, Kubelet in Kubernetes, and CNI
daemon-like flannel follow the node agent architecture [51].
The third approach is the sidecar pattern that launches the communication
layer as a container for every container in the cluster, calling it a sidecar.
It provides trade-offs between library and node agent approaches. From a
security perspective, it follows the least privilege principle, meaning each
sidecar is responsible for authenticating requests coming to a single container
associated. Whereas, node agents manage security for all containers running
on the node, increasing the trusted scope and thereby chances of intrusion
by impersonation attacks. Sidecars usually run on the loopback interface,

18

Background

sharing the network IP and port space with other containers in the same pod.
Therefore, other pods cannot directly communicate with it. Configuration
to enforce traffic control and routing policies needs to be distributed across
all sidecars, which can be an overhead if the scope of configuration is not
well-defined. Nonetheless, this model provides a balance between features,
performance, and security. This model is implemented by Istio envoy proxies,
discussed in detail in the upcoming Section 2.5.1.

Figure 2.3.1: Different Service mesh implementations [3]
The sidecar proxy pattern is a commonly used service mesh, architecture
model [44]. A generic service mesh architecture, as shown in Figure 2.3.2,
has a control plane and a data plane. The control plane is responsible
for enforcing network policies and distributing configurations. It is also
responsible for encrypting inter-service communication and handling routing
between the services. The Data plane consists of all the sidecars deployed per
pod. It does the heavy-lifting work of intercepting incoming and outgoing
traffic to and from the pod. It is also responsible for service discovery
and registration, monitoring, implementing authentication and authorization,
performing health checks, and load-balancing. To manage the communication,
the control plane communicates with the data plane to propagate, translate
different policies, forward, and analyze network traffic to/from pods.
A service mesh should be able to handle the following features without
having to modify any functional logic of the underlying microservices [2].
Commonly known features of a service mesh are as follows [2, 39, 4].
1. Observability
• Feature set Metrics collection - Request latency, bandwidth usage,requests
rate
Graphical visualization - Application health, performance, request

19

Background

Figure 2.3.2: Service Mesh Architecture [4, 2]
flow, request volume per target
Fault identification - Logging and tracing
• Description For debugging purposes, it is essential to intercept incoming and
outgoing traffic of the pod. This information is useful to visualize
microservices statuses, such as if a service is overloaded, or to
understand success and failure rates and factors influencing these
values.
2. Routing
• Feature set Traffic management - Traffic splitting, traffic shaping, traffic
interception, traffic mirroring, rate-limiting
Testing - Fault and error injection, A/B testing
• Description Canary and Blue-green deployments, alpha, and beta testing
are some of the most time-consuming activities in the Software
development lifecycle. With the help of a service mesh, traffic can
be easily configured to conduct different scenarios designed for
testing.

20

Background

3. Automatic scaling
• Feature set Scaling - Scale up or down pods based on error rates and request
latency
• Description The microservice workloads, that is, pods in the service mesh
automatically scale depending on the incoming workload.
4. Separation of duties
• Feature set Development role - Focus on business logic
Operation role - Focus on inter-service communication and
managing network and security policies.
• Description Service
mesh
enables
developers
to concentrate on the functionality of the microservice. It should
not be the developer’s responsibility to configure an inter-service
communication process.
5. Trust
• Feature set Authentication and authorization, Encryption for inter-service
communication
• Description To set the least privilege access model, rules are enforced to allow
access between microservices, that is, not every service should be
accessible from every other service. Service mesh offers a way
to authenticate the end-user and encrypts the inter-service traffic.
(example mTLS)
6. Automatic service discovery and registration
• Feature set Use of underlying orchestration tool (example – Kubernetes),Use
of an external service registration tool.
• Description A mechanism is needed for consumers to discover dynamically

21

Background

changing locations of microservices. A service registry in
an orchestration tool keeps track of newly added and removed
instances of such ephemeral services.
7. Resilience
• Feature set Load-balancing, Circuit breaking, Implement retry and timeout
logic
• Description Service mesh handles failures to ensure resilience and maintains
reasonable QoS for the end-users. Modern service mesh load
balancing algorithms consider several parameters such as health
status, request latency, and current load variable of the node to
forward requests to the most ideal node. A service mesh provides
load-balancing capabilities at the application layer (layer 7) unlike
the underlying tool that provides load-balancing at the TCP/IP
layer(layer 3).

2.4

Selection

of

service

mesh

implementations
2.4.1

Meshes

As per InfoQ’s studies, in 2013, Airbnb released SmartStack, which utilized
the service discovery mechanism offered by HAProxy. From there onwards,
many companies started exploring the idea that a separate communication
layer can exist to manage network-related operations for microservices. In
the 2000s, Google developed stubby, Google Front End, Global software load
balancer, and gRPC, the concepts that have been referred to in Istio. In the
2010s, Twitter started working with scala-powered Finagle, which later turned
into Linkerd. Netflix explored the sidecar pattern in a proxy called Prana. In
2016, NGINX came up with the fabric model that required NGINX products
for implementation, but the concept was similar to service mesh [52].
Existing books, papers, and online resources point out Istio, Linkerd, and
Consul as the most popular and widely used open-source implementations
of service mesh. There are other meshes such as Kuma, and Traefik

22

Background

mesh(formerly known as “maesh”), which are less commonly used
implementations. AWS App Mesh is another example that is offered as a
service in the AWS cloud provider. There are other implementations, such
as the network service mesh built for telcos and ISPs, OpenShift service mesh
by Redhat, Open service mesh, NGINX service mesh, and Apache service
comb, which provide a similar feature set with minor differences [53, 54].

2.4.2

Selection Criteria

As discussed earlier, there are several options available to implement the
service mesh, but there are certain factors that need to be well-thought-out
when considering using a service mesh. It is not a straightforward decision,
and it has long-term effects on the development process and software lifecycle. In most cases, a solution with a rich feature set seems a favourable
option, but it could also bring technical complexities to the applications [53,
54]. In some use-cases, implementing a library or adopting the architecture
could be a good alternative to introducing service mesh, which is harder to
learn and implement. It is also essential to compare the performances of
different meshes to decide which one suits the best for a specific use case.
The choice of a service mesh is highly dependent on the requirements of the
applications [54]. After prioritizing these requirements, it is easier to select
two or three possible implementations and conduct performance testing on
them to compare further outcomes.
Based on the points discussed in the [53, 54], we devised a set of questions
and answered them after discussing them with a Development team at Infor,
as described in Appendix A, to identify possible options for service mesh
implementation. Table 2.4.1 shows the list of general features and weather
they are supported by service mesh implementation candidates. From this
data, Istio, Linkerd and AWS App Mesh come across as the most suited
choices. Istio has all the required features and also supports additional features
such as pre-built integrations with Prometheus and Grafana dashboard for
observability. It is an open-source service mesh and can be implemented on
a variety of platforms, including AWS and Azure. It has a rich set of features
that go beyond the required feature set.
Currently, In AWS App Mesh, service-to-service authorization rules are
implemented using IAM roles for user authorization. For fault injection, AWS
has a fault injection simulator which is a fully managed AWS service that
helps simulate faults to verify application resilience, security, and performance
[55]. On the other hand, it does not have support for other cloud providers,

23

Background

and it is tightly coupled with other AWS services. Infor base services are
built on top of AWS services, which enable automated configuration of
different AWS services necessary to create infrastructure and administrative
roles for customers [56]. Therefore, AWS App Mesh is a valid option for
implementation.
Linkerd has a solid feature set, and it is quite popular in the developers’
community as it is considered easy to install, is less complex, and it provides
limited features. However, the missing features could become quite important
features on the roadmap of the application. Ingress and egress traffic
management is easier in Istio as compared to Linkerd [57]. Other meshes
were not considered as they lack a feature set. Although App Mesh does
not have all the features supported by Istio, it offers some alternatives, and
it is well integrated with other services in AWS which makes it easy for Infor
products as they are utilizing the AWS cloud provider for various use cases.
Therefore, Istio and App Mesh are the selected service meshes for the thesis
implementation.

2.5

Istio

IBM, Google, and Lyft have announced the launch of Istio [58]. Istio defines a
standard approach for managing microservices’ traffic flow, enforcing access
policies, and aggregating telemetry data [59].

2.5.1

Architecture

On a high level, Istio consists of a data plane and a control plane ,as depicted
in Figure 2.5.1, similar to service mesh’s generic architecture. Istio has a third
plane called the management plane which is dedicated to governance, financial
management, metering, and multi-mesh management services [5]. The multimesh manager is an example of the management plane [60]. Supergloo
is another example that provides a management plane to discover multiple
clusters and manage control planes [61]. It queries different clusters to see
workloads and services on different clusters. The Data plane consists of envoy
proxies inserted into each pod, and they intercept all the traffic towards or
from the pod. Application containers in the pod are completely unaware of
the data plane proxy’s existence. The Data plane is responsible for loadbalancing, health-checking, authentication, authorization, and collecting a
variety of metrics from the application pod [5, 6, 41]. The control plane is the

24

Background

Table 2.4.1: Support for features per service mesh implementation
Quality

Feature

Istio

Observability

Access log collection
Metrics generation
Dashboard
Preconfigured tracing backends
mTLS
Service-to-service authorization
rules
Load-balancing
Percentage based traffic splitting
Header and path-based traffic
splits
Circuit breaking
Retry and timeout
Fault injection
Delay injection
Support for Kubernetes
Cloud integration with AWS
Cloud integration with Azure
Mesh expansion
Multi-cluster support

2

2

2

2

2


AWS
App
Mesh
2

2

2

2

2


2

2


2

2


Trust
Routing

Resilience

Platform

2


2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2


2

2

2

2

2
2
2

2

2
2

2


Linkerd
2
2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2
2
2

2

2
2

2

2

2
2


administrative plane that is responsible for data plane proxy configurations. It
provides policies and configurations to a set of envoy proxies to create a mesh
out of a set of isolated and independent proxies [5, 6, 41]. The control plane
provides API or CLI access to provide configuration changes, possibly through
a version-controlled CI/CD pipeline. It is the brain of the mesh system that
does not touch any network packets, but implements logical boundaries and
enforces routing or resilience behaviour through data plane proxies [5, 41, 62].
Istio control plane components consist of Pilot, Galley, Mixer, and Citadel.
The Pilot is the head of the control plane that keeps synchronization with
the underlying container orchestration platform, Kubernetes in a majority
of the cases. It translates the information received from other components
into xDS objects that are understandable by the proxies. It maintains the
locations of all the pods by interfacing with the Kubernetes service discovery
mechanism [5]. Furthermore, it is also responsible for traffic management and
resilience capacities, such as circuit-breaker and retries logic implementation

25

Background

[62]. Galley validates, manages, and distributes Istio configurations to
other control plane components. It uses a mesh configuration protocol to
distribute these configurations [5, 62]. It essentially isolates other components
of Istio from gathering data from Kubernetes. The Mixer is responsible
for invoking applied routing and traffic policies. When a service call is
made between services or from outside the cluster, the mixer is invoked to
verify the authorization policies and quota of requests to allow access. It
manages telemetry reporting after the completion of a request [5, 41] and it
enables Istio to work with multiple backends and environments by providing
abstraction between infrastructure backends and other Istio components [5,
62]. Citadel manages the security between services by implementing mTLS
to encrypt inter-service traffic. It is responsible for end-user and inter-service
authentication. Citadel agents send certificate-signing requests, which are
then signed and approved by Citadel’s CA component. It is responsible for
generating, deploying, rotating, and revoking keys and certificates. It can
integrate with an organization’s PKI infrastructure to perform key validation
operations [5]. Istio data plane proxy, which is the envoy proxy, is introduced
in each pod as a sidecar that is configured to observe all the incoming and
outgoing traffic to and from the pod. With the intercepted traffic information,
the proxy can evaluate access policies, gather metrics, encrypt data, perform
health checks, circuit-breaking, terminate TLS, gRPC, and apply traffic
control.

2.5.2

Core functionalities

Core functionalities of Istio include the summary of blog [63]:
• Container orchestration: Istio orchestrates containerized deployments
on the Kubernetes platform and also updates them.
• Traffic route management: Istio supports configuring a variety of
routing rules to define communication between microservices on a
fine-grained level. It supports zone-aware traffic distribution and load
balancing along with reliable failovers for HTTP/1.1, HTTP/2, gRPC,
and TCP traffic. Istio supports canary and blue-green deployment, as
well as A/B testing.
• Policy management: Istio provides a pluggable policy layer to enforce
security and traffic rules, along with rate limits and available quotas.

26

Background

Figure 2.5.1: Istio service mesh architecture [5, 6]
• Proxy services: Istio provides proxies for both server and client-side.
The client-side proxies manage service discovery, credentials injection,
load balancing, monitoring, and logging. The server-side proxy
manages rate-limiting, flow control, protocol translation, authentication
and authorization, and monitoring and logging.
• Security: Istio enforces security measures by providing mutual TLS
authentication between the services, which entails them a strong sense
of identity.
• Observability: From all the metrics, logs, and traces obtained from the
traffic, network policy enforcement decisions can be strengthened. Istio
provides out-of-box monitoring and tracing solutions such as integration
with Prometheus, Grafana, Kiali, and Jaeger.
Istio introduces several custom resource definitions (CRD) with its
installation. These CRDs are defined in manifest files written in YAML
syntax. With the help of kubectl commands, these CRDs are then applied
along with the application. The CRDs relevant to this project are -

27

Background

• Virtual Service – With the help of destination rules, it provides routing
capabilities to the service-specific pod. Virtual service configuration is
essential for A/B testing where traffic is forwarded to different versions
of application service from a single virtual service. Based on the order
of the destination rules, Istio evaluates them to forward the incoming
request to the correct target application service [64].
• Destination Rules - They define subsets to group different versions of a
single application service. Based on the specified weight to each subset,
A/B testing or canary deployments are implemented to switch between
the target versions. Destination rules also allow defining traffic policies
such as load balancing, TLS configuration, retry, timeout, or circuit
breaker settings. It also allows the configuration of fault injection to
introduce delays in response to test application resilience [64].
• Gateways - Ingress and Egress gateways are used to handle traffic at the
edge of the service mesh. Ingress gateway allows traffic management
configuration such as TLS configuration and ports to expose outside the
mesh. The egress gateway can be configured to limit the services which
can have access to the external network [64].

2.6

AWS App Mesh

AWS announced a new service called AWS App Mesh in November 2018,
which later went to General Availability(GA) in March 2019. It is not an opensource service, but it uses Envoy proxies as sidecars, the same as Istio, which
are open source and free of cost [2].

2.6.1

Architecture

AWS App Mesh architecture follows the sidecar pattern similar to Istio. On
a high-level design, it contains a control plane and a data plane. AWS App
Mesh service is a control plane hosted to manage and configure Envoy data
plane proxies. AWS App Mesh consists of the following components [65, 66].
1. Service Mesh: It is a logical boundary encompassing all the network
traffic flowing between services that reside in the mesh. It sets a logical
component to identify different entities such as virtual nodes, virtual
services, virtual routers, and routes as well as data plane proxies.

28

Background

2. Virtual Node: It is a logical pointer towards the actual discoverable
service running in EKS or EC2 instances or ECS or AWS Fargate [8].
Creating a virtual node is not enough in itself to enforce different policies
and configurations. It is a component that exposes the underlying
service to the service mesh architecture. Every service in the mesh has
a virtual node pointing to it.
3. Virtual Service: It provides an abstraction of the discoverable service
using a virtual node or virtual router with different routes enabling traffic
forwarding to the discoverable service. The names of the virtual services
are discovered using the actual name of the discoverable service. This
way, services discoverable before the implementation of service mesh
do not change the logical names.
4. Virtual routers and virtual routes: They handle traffic for one or more
virtual services defined in the mesh. Each router has one or several
virtual routes associated with it. A route matches certain rules defined
on the router to forward the request to the associated virtual node. The
traffic routing criteria include URL paths, HTTP headers, gRPC service,
or method names. Traffic can be routed to one virtual node and changed
to another over time, or a percentage of traffic can be defined for each
virtual node. This enables canary, blue-green deployment as well as
A/B testing.
5. AWS App Mesh Controller: It keeps a watch on changes in the custom
resource definitions of mesh, the virtual node, virtual service, virtual
router, and routes for creation, modification, and removal. It makes
the changes in the corresponding CRDs through App Mesh API. The
controller injects, the Envoy proxy and proxy route manager into the
pod [67, 68].
6. Envoy proxies: They are deployed using Envoy data plane sidecar
proxies along with each pod. For changes in configurations to the service
mesh, there is no need to change or redeploy services. They apply
received configurations to direct traffic appropriately to defined targets.
All traffic between the services is intercepted at this component.
7. Proxy route manager: It runs as an init container in the application
service pod and updates the IP table rules in the namespace to route the
traffic through the envoy proxy in the pod [67].

29

Background

The components of AWS App Mesh are installed using CRDs provided
for Mesh, VirtualNode, VirtualService, VirtualRouter, Virtual gateways, and
GatewayRoute, as depicted in Figure 2.6.1 [68, 67].

Figure 2.6.1: AWS App mesh components(CRDs) [7, 8]

2.6.2

Available and selected features

• Container orchestration: App Mesh is compatible with AWS ECS,
AWS EKS, and AWS Fargate running application workloads. Every
service starts an envoy proxy sidecar in the pod to register with the
service mesh [69, 70].
• Traffic routing: App Mesh allows configuring traffic rules between
services. With this feature, traffic can be moved to a new version
gradually or completely by specifying the percentage of traffic towards
each version of the same service. Canary, blue-green deployments and
A/B testing are possible because of this feature. Connection timeout and
automatic retries can be configured at the proxy level [69, 70].

30

Background

• Client-side traffic policies: App Mesh Envoy proxies load balance
requests incoming from all the clients in the mesh. It manages adding
healthy targets or removing unhealthy targets from the service backend
to ensure resilience to request failures [69, 70].
• Fully managed: App Mesh is a fully managed service that inserts Envoy
proxy in each service pod. No extra infrastructure installation is required
to manage communication [69, 70].
• Observability: App Mesh collects application metrics such as access
logs, traces, total requests, Queries per second (QPS), and response
latency. Metrics and traces can be analysed further by the AWS X-ray
service to provide more insights into the application performance. It
is also compatible with open source monitoring and visualization tools
such as Prometheus and Grafana, as Envoy proxy is open source [69, 70].
• Encryption: App Mesh supports inter-service traffic encryption with a
client-provided TLS certificate or AWS certificate manager to keep the
communication secure. With mutual TLS, it authenticates one service
with another [71]. It handles TLS termination, negotiation, and rotation
and keeps application logic free from these activities.

2.7

Related work

In the field of service mesh technologies, not a lot of research has been
conducted to study the technology and its application impacts thoroughly.
There are plenty of blog posts, online content, websites, and YouTube videos
explaining the working of the service mesh, but the research in the area
regarding performance implications and resource utilization of service mesh
architecture is lacking. Sources related to competitive analysis of service
meshes were studied to design the experiments conducted during the thesis
implementation [72, 13, 11, 73, 74, 75]. Most of the found sources are
not scientific research papers, therefore they lack certain details and their
credibility could be questioned. The reason to refer to these sources is to
understand the basis of several experiments conducted in the competitive
studies of service mesh. With this information, a strategy to perform
experiments for the competitive study of Istio and AWS App Mesh is designed.
In this section, RPS is used interchangeably with QPS, as essentially both
mean the same for a generic request-response system [76].

31

Background

2.7.1

Performance

benchmark

and

resource

utilization
Istio and Linkerd are the most popular implementations of service meshes.
Major sources concerning performance evaluation and comparison involve
these implementations [72, 13, 11]. AWS App Mesh and Istio comparisons
mostly involve theoretical work with feature comparison [73, 74, 75, 10].
Specially, three main sources were found that compare Istio and Linkerd
in terms of performance and resource utilization. The idea is to study the
strategies used by these sources and identify important takeaways that can be
helpful to design a comparison strategy for Istio and AWS App mesh.
The first source is the master’s thesis written by Erik Dahlberg,
summarized by Lars Larsson, which compares Istio 1.5.0 and Linkerd 2.7.1
in terms of features, response latency for the increasing number of users with
constant throughput, and CPU/Memory utilization of overall cluster resources
[11]. The benchmarking setup involves 4 virtual machines of type n1 standard
4 that have 4vCPU and 15 GB RAM on the GCP cloud platform. Istio is
installed with a demo profile that is designed to showcase Istio’s functionalities
[77]. A test application called TeaStore with 7 microservices is deployed on
the GKE cluster.
Apache JMeter is used as a load generator tool that produce a constant
request throughput, which is the number of requests generated per second
using 8 different HTTP requests. Latency is measured through Jmeter,
and CPU/Memory resource utilization is measured with node exporter and
Prometheus. The benchmark is run 3 times to ensure confidence in the
results. Every benchmark has 5 stages where the number of users is increased
by keeping a throughput of 5 requests per second (RPS). Initially, 20 users
are launched to warm up the setup for 3 minutes and then each user group
performs load testing for 14 minutes, with 5 minutes of cooling time between
two stages. There is no explanation found for the numbers chosen for the
benchmarks. These benchmarks are performed on applications deployed
without any mesh, with Istio mesh, and with Linkerd respectively. Based on
the graphs, approximate data is mentioned in Table 2.7.1 As compared to the setup without any service mesh, Istio causes 133%
more latency, 131% more CPU utilization and 45% increase in memory
utilization, whereas Linkerd causes 175% increase in latency, 97% more CPU
utilization and 11% memory utilization during the 20 users stage run. The
report concludes that Istio is a better option when it comes to maintaining

32

Background

Table 2.7.1: Statistics collected from graph approximations found in [11]:
Latency (P99) in milliseconds, CPU in millicores, and Memory in GB
Users
5
10
20
30
40

Latency
30
32
35
37
51

Bare
CPU
1000
1500
2200
3000
3800

Mem
9.20
9.70
9.80
9.90
9.95

Latency
51
60
90
100
135

Istio
CPU
2000
3000
5200
6800
8300

Mem
12.10
13.00
14.20
14.80
15.00

Linkerd
Latency CPU
75
1900
80
2800
100
4300
160
5800
351
5800

certain throughput with low latency at an expense of higher CPU utilization.
Linkered, on the other hand, is more suitable when the setup has lower
resources. It is not clearly stated which functionalities in Istio/Linkerd are
implemented with the application. With TLS and other functionalities in
place, the CPU/memory usage might be different depending on the intrinsic
behaviour of the implemented functionalities. Another observation is that
the overall CPU/memory is calculated for the cluster instead of considering
CPU/memory usage per control plane and data plane to have more visibility
in the cluster. Because of that, it is difficult to understand which component
is causing more consumption, resulting in a CPU/memory bottleneck. It
is mentioned that a demo profile of Istio is used, but it is not designed
for performance testing. Furthermore, it is also not advised to be used in
production, and it is not mentioned whether all components of the control
plane are enabled, which could be the cause of higher resource consumption.
The second source is the blog post on performance analysis comparison
between Istio 1.1.6 and Linkerd2-edge-19.5.2, written by Thilo Fromm [13].
This report concerns a comparison of the performance of Istio with all control
plane components(stock), Istio with several components disabled in the control
plane(tuned), and Linkerd focusing. It mainly compares the resource cost
and performance impact of service mesh architecture. Buoyant, the company
that created Linkerd, approached Kinvolk to compare Linkerd with Istio. It
is important to note that Kinvolk had an ongoing client work with Istio in
2019, hence the motivation behind this comparison is mainly to improve open
source technologies available for service mesh implementation. The goals
of this report include defining an open-source benchmarking framework to
measure operational costs per implemented service mesh architecture for the
designed scenarios. The strategy of testing is to load-test the application to

33

Mem
10.10
10.60
11.00
11.00
11.10

Background

a point where response latency is reasonable, and user experience does not
suffer. Despite the overall system being subjected to load-tests, the application,
and the mesh, an attempt is made to make sure that the response latencies are
pushed to the acceptable range and not beyond. RPS are kept constant and
response latency gauges the performance of the service mesh. There are two
limitations in this scenario, one is that the requested load (RPS) will never
be generated. If there is a delay in sending one request, it will eventually
slow down the consecutive requests. This triggers a domino effect that slows
down consecutive processes of sending requests, waiting for a response and
sending another request. Secondly, during this scenario, the service mesh
gets some idle time from processing, as there could be a point when it has no
request received as the response to the previous request is in flight. To avoid
this problem, the author forked a project wrk and created wrk2, which makes
an effort to compensate for the lost RPS by temporarily issuing double the
expected request count. P99 latency is important as it directly affects the user
experience. If one request gets delayed, the operations in the single request that
might be fetching multiple data also get delayed. P99 for individual requests
becomes more common for more complex operations, making it an essential
metric. Resource consumption is another significant metric, as service mesh
provides a wide range of features by consuming CPU/memory that ideally is
used for business logic operations. Lokomotive is a tool used for infrastructure
provisioning and automating performance testing [78].
The benchmark setup disables some components, such as mixer’s policy
feature, tracing, gateways, and Prometheus to compare Istio with bare
minimum components to reduce resource utilization. This tuned Istio is not
considered for the thesis implementation as the production setup will have a
lot more functionalities and observability tools which require all components
from the control plane. The benchmark setup involves 5 worker nodes of
type c2.medium with 24 vCPU and 64 GB RAM on Packet IaaS provider.
Performance testing and latency measurement are conducted from within the
cluster to avoid latencies introduced by ingress gateways. A sample application
provided by Linkerd called Emojivoto is deployed. The initial replicas of each
pod are not specified in the report. Multiple clusters across different data
centres are used to eliminate volatile network effects and achieve consistent
results. After deploying the mesh and load generator wrk2, tests are performed
and metrics are collected every 30 seconds until the tests finish. Then the
mesh and the generator are removed, and another mesh is installed to perform
the same steps again. The experiment is conducted multiple times to gain
statistical coverage. Ten minutes long benchmark with varying RPS on 30

34

Background

application replicas (90 microservices in total) is run to identify the point
where some failures are occurring. Some failures start to occur between 500
RPS and 600 RPS. The setup is subjected to 500 RPS for 30 minutes to get
the limit of the mesh where performance is acceptable at the highest point of
load it can sustain. After that, 600RPS are generated for 30 minutes where the
maximum limit of acceptable latencies are observed for Linked whereas for
Istio the measured latency is in minutes. Table 2.7.2 summarizes the results
for a 500 RPS test conducted for 30 minutes.
Table 2.7.2: Logarithmic latency comparison
Latency percentile
p50
p75
p90
p99
p99.9
p99.99

Log latency in milliseconds
Bare Istio Linkerd
2
4
5
3
5
6
4
6
7
5
800
8
6
1050 900
600
4000 1000

Istio has higher resources than Linkerd, but Linkerd uses fewer resources
by handling 600 RPS without needing to autoscale. Istio isn’t able to provide
600 RPS, but can manage up to 568 RPS. Overall, istio performs well under
high load, keeping the latency to an acceptable amount.
The third source is the performance benchmark written by Ivan Sim that
compares Istio 1.0.3 and Linkerd2-edge-18.11.1 in terms of response latency
and request throughput [79]. Fortio 1.3.1 is chosen as a load generator, echo
server, and report generator tool due to minimal dependencies. It supports
HTTP, HTTPS, gRPC, TLS protocols in benchmarking tests. The benchmark
setup contains 5 nodes, where 4 nodes are of type n1-standard-1 and the
remaining of type n1-standard-2. One node with a higher configuration is
dedicated for control planes of both Istio and Linkerd. Two Fortio echo servers
are deployed on 3 machines, one for a baseline that is without any mesh and the
other two for Istio and Linkerd. The load generator is launched on a dedicated
machine. Gke.sh script is used to automate the entire testing strategy including
the provision of the machines, testing, collecting metrics, and reporting [79].
It first provisions all 5 machines with respective components and runs a series
of tests where HTTP and gRPC load tests are performed on all 6 echo servers,
2 dedicated to baseline setup without any mesh, 2 for Istio-meshed setup, and
2 for Linkerd-meshed setup. Test 1 and test 3 were performed to measure the

35

Background

maximum HTTP and gRPC request load echo servers could sustain. Test 2 and
test 4 were performed using 75% of the lowest QPS value to avoid a warning
related to sleep falling behind events when testing against Istio, which gave the
lowest QPS in test 1 and test 3. The purpose of the test is to see how the system
behaves with not extreme but still considerable load, in order to not break the
system but see the performance under manageable load. Sleep falling behind
warnings occurs when the required QPS is higher than what your system can
sustain.
Table 2.7.3: Test data for different service mesh implementations. The number
of connections for each test is 32.
Tests
protocol
HTTP
HTTP
gRPC
gRPC

QPS
0
2374
0
2113

time
30sec
5min
30sec
5min

Baseline
p99.9
5.6-6.2
5-6
9.2 - 12
9-11

p75
1.2
1.1
2.6
2.3

QPS
30-35k
2374
14k-16k
2113

Istio
p99.9
32.5-72.6
35-55
30-75
36-45

p75
10.2
10
10.4
10.1

QPS
3.2-3.9k
2374
2.8k-3.6k
2113

Linkerd
p99
8.6 to 11.1
8-12
11.5-16.5
11-14

p75
2.7
2.4
4.2
4.2

For both Istio and Linkerd2, the latency was higher, and the throughput
was lower in all tests as compared to the baseline setup. The latency incurred
in Istio meshed setup was higher than Linkerd meshed setup in both HTTP
and gRPS tests. Similarly, the throughput was lower than Linkerd.
The conclusions of the papers are not of uttermost importance in the
thesis context, as they essentially compare Istio with Linkerd and not AWS
App Mesh. The results from different sources are subjective to the setup
details such as cloud platform, network latencies, number of worker nodes
and their configurations, nature of the tests executed and tools used to collect
and analyse data. Therefore, it would not be a fair or accurate comparison if
the results from these different sources are compared with each other. From
these results, a common observation is that Istio control plane components
are resource-intensive. In Dahlberg’s experiment, the time to the first byte
is considered latency, that is, the round-trip time to receive the first byte of
the response [80]. P75 latency is then calculated while plotting graphs and
making an analysis. The reason for doing so is not mentioned. In Fromm’s
blog post, we can see that p50, p75 and p90 latencies are smaller for Istio than
Linkerd, whereas, P99 and P99.99 latencies drastically increase for Istio. In
Sim’s blog post, both P75 and P99.9 latencies are larger for Istio than Linkerd.
Latencies for baseline are always less than Istio and Linkerd meshed setups in
all three sources. P75 is the only comparable latency in these sources as there
is not enough data in Dahlberg’s master thesis to retrieve P99 or P99.9 values,

36

QPS
10-12k
2374
6.5k-8.5k
2113

Background

although the graph has multiple latency percentiles, there is no description for
the same.
Table 2.7.4: Comparison of latency-related statistics, setup details, and test
scenario details collected from references
Throughput(QPS)
Duration(min)
Concurrent connections
Total requests
Baseline(p75)
Istio(p75)
Linkerd(p75)
Cloud provider
Load generator location
number of nodes
Node configuration

Dahlberg
2000
14
40
28000
25
70
160
GKE
Within the cluster
5
N1-standard-4

Fromm
500
30
NA
15000
0.5
0.7
0.8
Packet
Within the cluster
5
c2.medium

Sim
2374
5
32
11870
1.1
10
2.4
GKE
Within the cluster
1
n1-standard-1

Fromm’s experiment used the highest machine configuration, but
performed an experiment with lower throughput than the other two. After
converting the log latencies to the actual values (Antilog of latency to base 10)
Istio seems to maintain lower latency than Linkerd at least for p75. The same
trend can be seen in Dahlberg’s report as well. Contrarily, for a much lower
throughput in Sim’s experiment than Dahlberg’s, Istio causes more latency
than Linkerd. This could be due to lower node configurations and a lower
number of dedicated nodes per application stack (with/without mesh) but this
conclusion cannot be concretely confirmed.
Another article uses Locust as a benchmarking tool to measure the
maximum throughput, concurrent users, success and error rates, and response
latency a sample application can handle on three different solutions, namely,
azure app service, content delivery network, and Azure front door [81]. These
solutions are not relevant to service mesh, although the metrics collected
and the scenario performed in the article are relevant to design scenarios
for the thesis implementation. The scenario is to generate requests with 10
concurrent users and increase the number of users by 10 every second until
5000 concurrent users are spawned. The test is executed for 20 minutes. Data
collected from all 3 endpoints are plotted using Locust and the comparison
between the three solutions is analysed using metrics such as requests handled
per second, median response time, peak response time, and error rates per

37

Background

solution. This article describes a realistic scenario where RPS is not constant
and the number of concurrent users using the application changes over time.
This scenario would not give comparable values for the service mesh’s
resource consumption, as the request throughput will be different for each
service mesh. However, it is helpful to test the limits of the application in terms
of request latency, request throughput, and success/error rate with believable
numbers.
In Fromm’s experiment with 500 RPS subjected to the setup for 30
minutes, the CPU utilization and memory consumption are calculated per
container over small intervals of time. The median value of the highest values
is taken into account from three data points(bare, Istio, and Linkerd) during
the tests. Fromm’s observations about the CPU difference between Istio and
Linkerd are supported by Kipper’s experiment [12]. In Kipper’s experiment,
a custom-made Istio resilience Simulator is created for benchmarking and
the benchmark setup involves 4 to 6 nodes of type N1-standard-4 on a GCP
cloud in a GKE cluster. Datadog is used as a monitoring tool, although
in the setup configuration Prometheus installation is allowed. There is no
explanation about the duration of the test in Kipper’s experiment. From
both the experiments, it can be concluded that Linkerd has the edge over
Istio concerning CPU utilization. Both experiments measured resource
consumption by removing the mixer component of Istio. In Fromm’s
experiment, almost 1000 m cores were used, whereas in Kipper’s 100 m cores
of CPU were used less by doing so. Similar conclusions can be made about
memory consumption for Istio components being higher than Linkerd’s from
Dahlberg’s data and Fromm’s experiment, but from Dahlberg’s data, it is
difficult to understand which components are most memory intensive.

38

Background

Table 2.7.5: Comparison of CPU and memory statistics collected from [12, 13]
Reference name

Fromm

Kipper

Experiment

Metric

Component
Application
proxy
memory(GB)
sidecar
500RPS for 30 minutes
Control plan
Application
proxy
CPU(m)
sidecar
Control plan
No memory
statistics
X
100 RPS for 6 hours collected
Application
proxy
CPU(m)
sidecar
Control plan

Istio

Linkerd

4.6

0.4

3.5

0.5

2300

1600

1400

100

X

X

310

200

750

22

39

Background

40

Method and implementation

Chapter 3
Method and implementation
Based on the findings of Section 2.7, it can be concluded that AWS App Mesh
is not a highly researched topic. To the best of our knowledge, no articles
related to performance comparison between Istio and AWS App Mesh were
found at the time of writing the thesis. The scenarios described in other thesis
implementations, blog posts, and articles about comparing Linkerd and Istio
can apply to benchmark Istio and AWS App Mesh in terms of performance.
To design these scenarios, it is important to first drill down the technology
details, application details, and toolset that can be used for conducting different
processes. The following sections discuss the tools, the implementation of
the selected technology, and a thorough description of the benchmark. These
sections deal with the core implementation of the thesis.

3.1

Selection of tools and technologies

The comparison between Istio and AWS App Mesh is based on factors such
as performance, resource utilization, application visibility, and solution cost.
As the service mesh is an essential component due to the features it provides,
the comparison does not include any baseline setup without a service mesh
implementation.
The idea of the first scenario is to find the optimal request throughput that
both the Istio-meshed and the AWS App Mesh-meshed sample application
can handle without causing any failures and yet maintaining an acceptable
response latency. The average response latency is 1280 ms for desktop
applications in 2020, although Google suggests achieving response latencies

41

Method and implementation

under 200 ms [81]. For implementation, we consider 300 ms as the acceptable
median latency(p50) [82]. We try to maintain 99 percentiles latency (p99)
below 1000 ms, considering server-side processing time and inter-service
communication delay. Keeping these numbers in mind, the benchmark is
performed to find the maximum request throughput that can be achieved by
both Istio and AWS App Mesh. Almost no failures are accepted during this
test. Once this optimal point is found, in the second scenario, the benchmark
is performed to observe response latency distribution for a constant request
rate, which is 75% of the lowest of the optimal throughput achieved from the
first testing scenario.
In the third scenario, a prolonged test needs to be run to retrieve CPU
utilization and Memory consumption statistics for both the meshes, as resource
utilization is an important factor. Both the meshes are subjected to high
load for several minutes to get consistent results. Data of memory and CPU
utilization is collected per control plane and data plane of both the meshes.
Based on all the data retrieved, Istio and AWS App Mesh are compared
with one another in terms of resource utilization, throughput, and response
latency. Keeping these 3 different scenarios, the following tools mentioned
in Table 3.1.1 are chosen for conducting performance benchmarking. Other
tools and technologies are available. For example, wrk/wrk2 and Locust for
performance testing, Datadog for monitoring, and ECS or Fargate service
on AWS for container orchestration. But, Locust does not provide constant
throughput, Datadog is not an open-source tool, and ECS or Fargate service
would require changes in the current way of deploying microservices at Infor.
Therefore, the technology stack mentioned in Table 3.1.1 is the most suitable
stack to conduct the designed benchmarking scenarios.
Process
Implementation
Performance testing
Monitoring
Traceability
Visualization

Tools
EKS of AWS
Fortio
Prometheus
Kiali, Jaeger, AWS X-ray service
Grafana, Kiali, AWS X-ray service

Table 3.1.1: Selected tools and technologies

42

Method and implementation

3.2

Application and cluster details

Experiments mentioned in the related work involve comparing performance
and resource consumption of service meshes with plane Kubernetes to
understand the magnitude of increased latency and resource utilization. In
the thesis implementation, this scenario is not considered, as using a service
mesh is a requirement, and the selection of the right type of the same is
the objective. For the implementation of different scenarios, it is important
to select an application with multiple microservices. BookInfo is a sample
application provided by Istio that has 4 microservices to demonstrate various
features of Istio, as shown in Figure 3.2.1. All microservices are written in
different languages such as Java, Python, Node, and Ruby. Infor’s applications
are currently developed in the microservice architecture using Spring boot,
although as the number of microservice grows, the language will not be limited
to Spring boot. Therefore, it could be beneficial to test a polyglot application.
This application does not have specialities with Istio, and that makes it
deployable with both Istio and the service mesh. The 4 microservices in the
application include Productpage, Details, Ratings, and Reviews. Productpage
serves as a UI of the microservice and internally calls Details to show book
information. Details internally call Reviews to display available book reviews.
Details also call ankingto fetch rankings of the book. This application launches
3 versions of Reviews microservice to demonstrate the canary deployment
feature supported by service mesh. Review v1 does not make any call to the
ratings service, whereas Reviews v2 and v3 call ratings to display ratings in
black and orange coloured stars, respectively.
With this application, more features supported by Istio can also be
implemented easily, as the application is fully compatible and mainly designed
to showcase Istio’s capabilities. On the other hand, special efforts are required
to deploy the same application in AWS App Mesh. In order to add more
functionalities, there is a lack of readily available scripts written for the
BookInfo application for AWS App Mesh. Due to the time constraint on the
implementation of the thesis, Canary deployment is the only feature selected
for deployment on the meshes.
To implement the designed scenarios, a single EKS cluster with version
1.18 is deployed on the AWS cloud platform. This can be done in several ways,
such as a Terraform or CloudFormation on AWS. At Infor, we have automation
suites designed with the help of CloudFormation to deploy EKS clusters with
required configurations. The Provision cluster has 3 nodes, where each node

43

Method and implementation

Figure 3.2.1: Application without any mesh [9]
is dedicated to running specific application workloads. Each node is deployed
in an EC2 instance and has instance type m5.8xlarge. This instance type gives
32vCPU and 128 GB memory to each node. As discussed in the theoretical
background, Kubernetes is an underlying orchestration tool used by the EKS
service on AWS. The control plane of Kubernetes is managed by AWS, but
the nodes that are deployed are controlled and managed by the user. One node
runs the Istio-meshed application, another node runs the AWS App Meshed
application, and the third node contains the control plane of both meshes and
Fortio pod used for benchmarking. Separate labels are assigned to each node
to ensure that the control plane does not hinder the performance of the data
plane nodes. Based on these labels, pods of a certain application are assigned
to the node they belong to. In this way, the gained data is more consistent and
is not polluted due to other mesh or the benchmarking tool. Benchmarking is
conducted from within the cluster to reduce the effect of network latency due
to the distance between the client and the server.

3.3

Application deployment on Istio and
AWS App Mesh

Istio version 1.11.0 is installed with the help of istioctl binary. There are
multiple ways to install Istio, such as using helm charts, Istio operator, or

44

Method and implementation

Node

Node
Label

Node 1

app=
system

Node 2

Node 3

app=
Istio

Workload
Istio
control
plane
App Mesh
control
plane
Fortio pod
Istiomeshed
application

App Meshapp=
meshed
appmesh
application

Namespace

Namespace
label

Monitoring

Istiosystem

-

Prometheus,
Grafana,
Kiali, Jaeger

appmeshsystem

-

Prometheus,
Grafana

fortio

-

istiobookinfo

istio-injection=
enabled

appmeshbookinfo

appmesh.
k8s.aws /sidecar
Injector
Webhook=
enabled,
mesh= appmeshbookinfo

Istioproxies to
collect data
App Mesh
data proxies
to
collect data,
AWS X-ray
daemons

Table 3.2.1: Cluster and application set up details

45

Method and implementation

direct virtual machine installation. Istioctl binary is used because it was the
easiest option with minimal configuration. AWS App Mesh provides a helm
chart for easy installation of the control plane. However, it does not provide
additional details about the control plane and how it works because it is not
an open-source technology. The default profile offered by Istio is used for
this experiment because it is production-ready and suitable for performance
testing. In both Istio and AWS App Mesh, the control plane can be deployed
outside the cluster that runs the application workloads. Istio provides an
external control plane installed on a separate cluster that is accessible from
the data plane. AWS provides an option to install the control plane as a
Fargate service, where the control plane pod runs in a serverless environment
[67]. This option was not explored in the thesis, as the purpose of the
thesis is to essentially compare the impact of the control planes on CPU
and memory utilization. If the control plane is removed from the cluster
of workload execution, it might introduce additional latency due to intercluster communication overhead between the control and data plane. However,
Fargate can significantly impact the overall cost of the solution, depending on
the load and the designed scenarios (Discussed in Chapter 5).
The selected feature for implementation is canary deployment. Canary
deployment is a way of deploying multiple versions of the applications in the
same application stack. This is to ensure that a certain version is thoroughly
tested before it is completely rolled out [83]. To achieve this, some percentage
of traffic is routed towards a new version and some towards the old. Traffic
rate toward the new version is observed, and the user response is tracked to
understand whether customers appreciate the new version. Once the customer
confidence is established in the new version, more traffic can be sent towards
the new version. Eventually, 100% of traffic can be sent to the new version,
and the old version of the microservice can be completely removed. The
reason to select this feature for the thesis is that it is on the roadmap for
Infor’s production-grade application. In an actual canary deployment, only
two versions of a service are involved, an old and a new version, but in the
test scenarios we have deployed 3 versions because there could be 3 release
candidates as well. As the feature set grows, the resource consumption of
the control plane and the data plane proxies is also affected by the service
meshes. Other features such as authentication and authorization, retry and
timeout mechanisms, and securing inter-service traffic are also important and
need to be implemented in the future, but due to time constraints, only a single
feature is selected.
For application deployment on both the meshes, an automation suite is

46

Method and implementation

created, and the code is made public on a GitHub repository [84]. It is used to
deploy the entire application stack on Istio and AWS App Mesh, and remove
it after testing. The application is deployed with a Kubernetes deployment
YAML manifest. This manifest is the same for both the meshes, with some
minor changes discussed later. This contains 6 deployment resources to
create 10 replicas of each microservice for one mesh. The application has 4
microservices with one of them running 3 different versions of the application,
making it a total of 6 microservices. Therefore, altogether 60 replicas are
deployed per meshed application. The application base code is not mentioned
in the deployment process, as it is already made public by Istio and is also
available on the code repository [85]. The deployed application on Istio
is shown in Figure 3.3.1, whereas Figure 3.3.3 and Figure 3.3.2 depict the
deployed application in AWS App Mesh.
On a plane Kubernetes cluster, canary deployment can be handled by
maintaining a specific ratio of the number of replicas of each version of
the microservice. In Istio, a CRD called Destinationrule is used along with
VirtualService for Reviews microservice, as it has 3 different versions running.
All versions are targeted to have an equal load, which can be done in two ways.
One way is to use DestinationRule to define a round-robin strategy for load
balancing, as shown in Listing 1. Another way is to create a virtual service
along with DestinationRule and use subsets to define the weight for each target
version, as shown in Listing 2.
For the second approach mentioned in Listing 2, if there are more than
two versions, it is more tedious to define exactly equal percentage for all
3 versions. Hence, the first approach is implemented for the thesis, being
Productpage the only microservice exposed outside the cluster. Specially,
it uses a virtualservice mounted on the default Istio ingressgateway that is
installed with the default Istio profile.
The code in Listing 3 makes it possible to reach the application from
outside using productpage microservice’s user interface. Istio ingress is
deployed along with the controller when we install Istio. By mapping a
gateway resource onto this ingress, it becomes possible for the user to reach
the application.
When deploying the same application on AWS App Mesh, the application
namespace
is
labelled with “appmesh.k8s.aws/sidecarInjectorWebhook=enabled” to allow
data proxy sidecar injection in every pod launched in appmesh-bookinfo
namespace. A resource of type Mesh is created in Listing 4 to associate the
application with the application namespace.

47

Method and implementation

Figure 3.3.1: Application Bookinfo with Istio service mesh
To deploy each microservice in the mesh, three components are deployed,
namely, VirtualService, VirtualNode and VirtualRouter with single or
multiple routes. In the case of microservice reviews, every version
has a separate VirtualNode associated with it. A VirtualService with
a VirtualRouter is created to define access policy to these 3 versions.
VirtualRouter has routes to 3 VirtualNodes with equal weight in order to
allow equal traffic distribution among all 3 versions. Similarly, for the other
3 services, a single route is created, allowing the traffic to a VirtualNode
associated with the actual service.
At this point, the application is deployed in the mesh but not reachable
from outside the cluster because there is no ingress gateway to allow access
to users. For this purpose, a pod is deployed with AWS App Mesh envoy
proxy image in a deployment resource and exposed using a service of type
Load balancer. This attaches a Network load Balancer to the service of the
ingress pod, which is then attached to a VirtualGateway to enable route to
the VirtualService created for productpage. This establishes the connection
between external Load Balancer and internal services, allowing access to end
users.
For performing testing scenarios, Fortio is deployed as a pod in namespace
Fortio on Node-1. This deployment is exposed with the help of Kube-proxy to

48

Method and implementation

Figure 3.3.2: AWS App Mesh: Service reviews-v1 architecture [10]

Figure 3.3.3: Application Bookinfo with AWS App Mesh [10]

49

Method and implementation

access it on the local browser. A service can also be created to access Fortio
URL from outside the cluster. Scripts were created to conduct automated tests
to collect and analyse data. These scripts and their purpose shall be discussed
in detail in Section 3.4.
For observability and traceability, Istio offers out-of-box solutions, such
as Kiali, Jaeger, Prometheus, and Grafana. In the case of AWS App Mesh,
Prometheus and Grafana can be installed with App Mesh-specific dashboards.
AWS X-Ray is a service that can be integrated with AWS App Mesh, and
used to trace and understand the percentile distribution of response latencies
of the application [86]. Kiali and Jaeger are open-source solutions used by
Istio to provide the same functionality as the AWS X-ray service. Prometheus,
Grafana, Kiali, and Jaeger are deployed in the Istio-system namespace on
Node-1. Whereas, AWS X-ray creates a daemon container in each pod in the
AWS App-meshed application to collect telemetry data and send it to the AWS
X-ray service. To enable AWS X-ray service to collect logs from AWS App
Mesh data plane proxies, tracing.provider=x-ray and tracing.enabled=true
parameters are passed to the app-mesh controller helm chart when installing
the controller [86].

3.4

Performance testing

After setting up the environment, it is necessary to understand the maximum
throughput possible for the service meshed applications. With Fortio’s QPS
parameter set to 0, it tries to achieve the maximum throughput, but the effect
of other parameters such as the number of connections and the number of
pods running per service on the throughput is essential to measure [87].
Preliminary tests were executed with different values of QPS, connections,
and number of containers with both Istio and AWS App Mesh to understand
the relationship between the throughput, the number of concurrent connections
made from Fortio, and the number of pods per microservice. It was a common
observation in both meshes, that an increasing number of threads results in
better throughput, as mentioned in Fortio’s GitHub FAQs. As the autoscaling
was not set up for pods, it was essential to know the number of pods that
should be launched for the scenarios that were conducted. The observations
and detailed results are discussed in Chapter 4.
The first scenario is designed to find the highest throughput each meshed
application can achieve. A script in Listing 14 is created to run the test
30 times. Each test runs for 30 seconds with QPS set to 0, to achieve the

50

Method and implementation

maximum possible throughput with the provided settings. The number of
connections is set to 220 for each test. The reason for selecting 30 seconds
for each sample is that time frame was sufficiently large to observe changes
in the maximum achieved throughput, choosing a larger number did not make
substantial difference in the outcome as the setup was not subjected to any
dynamic load changes.
The script in Listing 14 is executed twice, both for the AWS App Meshed
application and Istio meshed application. This script generates a histogram of
the percentile distribution of response latencies for each test. It also saves the
graph and text output in JSON format at a specific path. This is later used for
analyzing and comparing collected data.
In the second scenario, 75% of the lowest value of QPS achieved for Istio
and AWS App Meshed applications are set as the new QPS, to escape the
warnings received during the first scenario testing. To perform this test case,
the number of connections is set to 220 and each benchmark is executed for
5 minutes. In total, 30 such samples were collected per meshed application.
The test ran for 150 minutes in total for each meshed application.
In the third scenario, a single benchmark is executed with QPS set to 75%
of the lowest QPS, connections set to 220, and duration set to 15 minutes. In
this experiment, the script is executed for a longer period to stabilize the setup
and get more consistent results of CPU utilization and memory consumption
for each meshed application.
Details of the collected data values and results are discussed in Chapter 4.

51

Method and implementation

52

Results and Analysis

Chapter 4
Results and Analysis
In the pre-benchmarking phase, tests are performed to find the relationship
between the achieved QPS, the number of containers, and the number of
connections. From the gathered test data in table 4.0.1, we can observe that
Istio achieves the best throughput with 10 containers and 98 connections,
whereas AWS App Mesh achieves the highest throughput with 10 containers
and 220 connections . As per Fortio’s FAQ page, the number of connections
that can be handled by the mesh is 2 to 4 times the number of CPU cores of
the machines. Each node has 32 vCPU cores, so the maximum connections
handled per mesh (every meshed application has a dedicated single node) is
somewhere between 64 and 128. Although, for AWS App Mesh, this number
is almost 6 times the number of CPU cores. If the number of connections is
reduced, AWS App Mesh shows lower QPS than it can handle. Therefore in the
benchmarking scenarios, 220 is the number of connections used for both Istio
and AWS App Mesh. As a general rule, for the best throughput, low latency
and a high number of concurrent connections are required, so having a high
number of connections is not a problem for Istio. In fact, Istio achieves similar
throughput with 98 and 150 connections, as observed in the initial tests. The
data listed in Table 4.0.1 is plotted in figure 4.0.1 on a logarithmic scale to
make data points easy to compare with each other.
From Figure 4.0.1, we can observe that both the number of containers and
the concurrent connections influence the request throughput. However, once
the limit is reached, increasing either value does not achieve higher throughput.
In the case of Istio, for the test samples 11 and 12, the throughput does not
increase with the same number of connections despite scaling out to add 5
more containers per microservice. Samples with a number of connections

53

Results and Analysis

Istio
Requested Achieved
QPS
QPS
300
300
400
400
500
1000
1000
1100
1500
1500
1500
1500
1500

177
298
311
398
464
492
993
1064
1000
1072
1013
980
1000

AWS App Mesh
Number
of connections

32
32
32
32
32
32
64
98
64
98
128
128
150
No data

Number
of
Requested Achieved
conta- QPS
QPS
iners
1
300
293
2
400
312
3
400
397
4
500
496
4
600
521
4
1000
524
10
1000
657
10
1000
657
10
1000
625
10
1000
623
10
1100
652
15
1000
804
10
1000
907
1000
925
1000
925
1033
925

Number
of connections
32
32
98
98
32
32
64
98
64
98
98
130
150
220
250
220

Table 4.0.1: Initial test data for Istio and AWS App Mesh

54

Number
of
containers
2
2
5
5
5
5
5
5
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10

Results and Analysis

Figure 4.0.1: Istio and AWS App Mesh: Pre-benchmarking test
between 64 and 150 show a similar throughput value of approximately 1000
QPS. For the AWS App Mesh, results can be confirmed with the last 4 test
samples, where the throughput seems to have reached the maximum value
when the number of connections is 220 and the number of containers is 10.
One interesting point to observe is that the AWS App Mesh can handle almost
double the number of connections as Istio to get the highest throughput.
After collecting data from the first scenario execution, a script in Listing
15 is created to plot the retrieved data in the form of columns. Original data
is in the JSON format, where several details are mentioned. Response latency
distribution of p50, p75, p90, p99 and p99.9 is plotted by fetching relevant
data from each JSON output. The variable file_prefix is changed to get results
for both Istio and AWS App Mesh data from Listing 15.
Microsoft Excel is used for plotting the received latencies. Figure 4.0.2
shows that Istio receives throughput between 614 and 1064 QPS. In the case
of AWS App Mesh, the throughput ranges from 960 to 1005 QPS. Except
for a few values, Istio consistently maintains a throughput above 1000 QPS.
For AWS App Mesh, most values are below 1000 QPS with a few values
being close to 1005 QPS. There is no drastic difference between the maximum

55

Results and Analysis

Figure 4.0.2: Maximum QPS supported by Istio and AWS App Mesh
throughput achieved by these meshed applications.
For Istio, even though the achieved throughput is higher than AWS App
Mesh by almost 100 QPS, the latency distribution for p99 and p99.9 values are
drastically higher than those observed for AWS App Mesh, as shown in Figure
4.0.3 and Figure 4.0.4 The average p99.9 latency for Istio test samples is 1592
ms and for AWS App Mesh, it is 482 ms. The average p99 latency for Istio
samples is 1458 ms and for AWS App Meshed samples, it is 422ms. Accepted
values for maximum response time without affecting the user experience is
1000 ms for p99 latency. For both p99 and p99.9, this limit is surpassed by
Istio. The average p75 latency for Istio is maintained under acceptable limits,
which means almost 25% of the requests are exceeding the acceptable latency
limit. In the case of AWS App Mesh, both p99 and p99.9 latencies are within
the acceptable range. On the other hand, for the average latency (p50), Istio
performs better as compared to AWS Mesh. Istio’s average of p50 is 118 ms,
whereas for AWS App Mesh is 243 ms. It should be noted that this experiment
is testing extreme values and the high QPS that each meshed application can
handle. This is a border case and may not happen that frequently, as it is the
highest QPS handled by the setup. In production scenarios, autoscaling is
implemented on both container and virtual machine levels, which ensures that
new resources are created to handle the increasing number of requests.
For the second scenario, the lowest value of average QPS is 990 for AWS
App Mesh. Therefore, the next test case is run with 75% of 990 QPS, that

56

Results and Analysis

Figure 4.0.3: Istio: Latency distribution graph when QPS is 0

Figure 4.0.4: AWS App Mesh: Latency distribution graph when QPS is 0

57

Results and Analysis

Figure 4.0.5: Actual QPS values supported by Istio and AWS App Mesh when
QPS is 743
is, 743 QPS. As the test is run for 5 minutes per test for 30 test samples, the
achieved results are more realistic and consistent. From Figure 4.0.5, both the
meshes maintained a constant QPS of 743, with 2 tests being an exception
in the case of Istio. The achieved QPS fell to almost 500 QPS for these
exceptional data points.
The observations in this benchmark are different from the first one. From
Figure 4.0.6, in the case of Istio, the p99.9 latency is 288-299 ms, with samples
16 and 17 as exceptions. The two exceptional values of increased latencies
seem to have caused lower QPS than expected. In those two cases, p50 and
p75 are almost close to 100 ms, which is the lowest latency observed in this
test for both Istio and AWS App Mesh. On the contrary, p90, p99, and p99.9
have approximately 800 ms, 1500 ms, and 1800 ms, which are the highest
latencies observed in Istio, and have exceeded the acceptable latency limits
for p99 and p99.9. Note that, from both the first and second scenarios for
Istio-meshed application, if 50% or 75% of the requests complete much faster
than the expected latency, in this case (200 ms – 240 ms), the remaining 25%
of the requests take much longer time (700-1800 ms) than the expected latency.
It appears that the faster response for 75% of the request is compensated by
slower responses to 25% of the requests. Whereas, apart from the exceptional
cases, the latency distribution is consistent and within the acceptable range.
From Figure 4.0.7, p99.9 lies between 370-593 ms, and p99 lies between

58

Results and Analysis

Figure 4.0.6: Istio: Latency when QPS = 743, number of connections = 32
and the test running time is 5 minutes per sample (total 30 samples collected)

Figure 4.0.7: AWS App Mesh: Latency when QPS = 743, number of
connections = 32 and the test is run for 5 minutes per samples (total 30 samples
collected)

59

Results and Analysis

345-523 ms. Both p99.9 and p99 values are within the acceptable range.
Although there are 2 exception data points, samples 1 and 30, where all latency
percentiles from p50 to p99.9 have increased than their respective latency
ranges. Unlike Istio, where some requests have a faster response than the
others in exceptional cases, these data points have overall higher latencies for
all requests.
The results from the first scenario suggest that Istio can handle a
higher request throughput, although, at the highest possible throughput, the
performance suffers significantly for p99 and p99.9 values. Moreover, Istio
handles 50-75% of requests with decent response times, which are better than
those for AWS App Mesh. AWS App Mesh, on the other hand, performed
consistently by keeping the latency percentiles within the acceptable range. In
the second scenario, when both the setups are subjected to the same request
throughput, AWS App Mesh have overall higher latencies for all percentiles
as compared to the respective latency percentiles observed in Istio.
In the third scenario, CPU and memory utilization of both the control plane
and data plane is measured for a fair comparison. Overall cluster or node CPU
and memory statistics are not taken into consideration, as they do not give
proper visibility into the components of the architecture consuming higher
resources and causing bottlenecks to the performance. From Figure 4.0.8,
it can be seen that the CPU utilization for both setups from the data plane
proxies are comparable. For a significant, yet bearable load projected on the
meshed applications, the AWS data plane proxy consumes 4-5 vCPU cores,
whereas Istio data plane proxies consume 3 to 4 vCPU cores. AWS App Mesh
and Istio use 14% and 10% of total available CPU cores, respectively. From
Figure 4.0.9, we can observe that for the control plane, the difference between
CPU usage in the data plane for both the meshed applications is negligible and
therefore difficult to compare. From Figure 4.0.10, we can observe that the
memory usage for the data plane in Istio is 0.7% higher than that in AWS App
Mesh. For the control plane, the memory usage is again not significant enough
for a fair comparison, as shown in figure 4.0.11. Istio consumes only 140MBs
more than the AWS App Mesh. A general observation is that AWS App Mesh
has more consistency for resource utilization as compared to Istio, as in most
graphs, Istio has spiked abruptly when no changes have been explicitly made
to the setup.
The control plane resource consumption in the control plane depends on
the number of implemented features, as suggested in [50]. As we are testing
only a single feature of the canary deployment, it is hard to tell if the results
found in this experiment would be the same when more features are added.

60

Results and Analysis

Figure 4.0.8: Data plane: CPU
As far as this experiment is concerned, both AWS App Mesh and Istio are
valid choices in terms of CPU and Memory utilization, as there is a negligible
difference in resource utilization for both data and control plane.
Looking at the comparison drawn out in Table 4.0.2, Istio proves to be a
better solution and in some parameters, AWS App Mesh in others. Therefore,
it is not a clear choice to pick one over the other as all the mentioned
parameters are deemed equally important for the selection of the mesh.
However, performance can be considered an utmost important parameter if we
consider deployment efforts and resource utilization secondary. The reason for
deployment efforts being secondary is that it is only a different way or require
additional steps to achieve the same results in one mesh than the other, but it
does not affect the end user in any way. Moreover, resource utilization statistics
do not draw out any conclusive results of one mesh being better than the other,
therefore, it can also be considered secondary.
In conclusion, AWS App Mesh has more consistent performance in
all 3 scenarios. It can handle more concurrent connections as compared
to Istio to achieve the maximum possible throughput, and it maintains an
acceptable latency range that ensures good QoS and user experience. However,
for manageable yet high request load, Istio has performed extremely well
and better than AWS App Mesh, with a few exceptions. At Infor, the
responsiveness of the application is more vital than consistency, as the
customer base can tolerate infrequent lagging response but would expect and

61

Results and Analysis

Figure 4.0.9: Control plane: CPU

Figure 4.0.10: Data plane: Memory

62

Results and Analysis

Figure 4.0.11: Control plane: Memory

Compared parameter
Deployment efforts
API Request

Latency(max load)
Latency(manageable load)
Control plane
Data plane

Metric
Number
of
configurations to achieve
end-to-end application
connectivity
Request throughput
Concurrent connections
Error rate
p99.9 / p99 / p90
p75
p50
p99.9 / p99 / p90
p75
p50
Memory usage
CPU usage
Memory Usage
CPU Usage

Better solution
Istio
Istio
AWS App Mesh
AWS App Mesh
AWS App Mesh
Istio / AWS App Mesh
Istio
Istio
Istio
Istio
AWS App Mesh
Inconclusive
AWS App Mesh
Istio

Table 4.0.2: Comparison based on gathered data and analysis

63

Results and Analysis

appreciate extremely fast and responsive application over consistently slower
application. Therefore, we can conclude that Istio is a better choice for Infor’s
production-grade applications, despite the consistency provided by AWS App
Mesh in all scenarios.
Although the decision regarding the mesh choice is already clear, it is
worth discussing factors such as installation and upgrade process, monitoring
support, and overall solution cost to compare the technologies even further.
Chapter 5 talks about these factors in detail.

64

Discussion

Chapter 5
Discussion
To understand which solution is best suited for Infor’s production-grade
environments, it is essential to know which candidate satisfies all the
parameters that are deemed important from the application perspective.
This section will discuss the solutions to compare installation and upgrade
processes, deployment efforts, performance, response latencies, throughput,
and the cost of the solutions.
Istio is easy to install and has several installation mechanisms, but the AWS
AppMesh is easier to install because it has strong ties with AWS services. Both
have similar concepts and functionalities. Although, configuring Istio with the
bare-minimum features to get the application up and running in the mesh was
much easier to configure as compared to AWS App Mesh. This observation
is subjective to each individual. However, the number of steps required for
configuring Istio to enable applications in the mesh is lower than that for AWS
App Mesh.
New versions bring new features or bugfixes to known security or
functionality issues. This makes it essential to upgrade the version on a regular
basis. Istio is an open-source project, and as such, it has an active community
that releases minor versions on a weekly basis. Istio provides different upgrade
methods to accommodate an installed version of Istio. These can be tedious
to perform without a decent understanding of the working components of
Istio. Upgrades are prone to failures in one or more components of Istio, so
the process is not recommended for more than two minor versions at a time.
Overall, upgrading can be an overwhelming process for Istio, and the method
of upgrade depends on the installation method. AWS App Mesh, on the other
hand, does not provide any option to upgrade as the service is fully maintained

65

Discussion

and managed by AWS.
From the pre-benchmarking experiment, it can be seen that the request
throughput is dependent on the number of concurrent connections as well as
the number of containers. AWS App Mesh can support a higher number of
concurrent connections as compared to Istio, meaning it can sustain a certain
throughput while being subjected to a higher number of simultaneous client
connections as compared to Istio. When subjected to a high or manageable
load, Istio varies the QPS varies frequently, whereas AWS App Mesh
maintains a stable QPS. This means in case of highly volatile load conditions,
AWS App Mesh might perform better by providing stable throughput.
In the first benchmarking scenario, Istio can provide higher throughput
than AWS App Mesh. Higher throughput signifies serving higher QPS.
Meaning, there would be less waiting time for requests to get processed.
Moreover, despite 50-75% users getting the best QoS, one downside of Istio is
that it spends more time in some requests, and as a result some users might feel
the application to be less responsive at certain occasions. In the case of AWS
App Mesh, the response time is more evenly distributed, meaning most users
will experience an average quality of service. This is a situation where the load
is extremely high and it is meant to break the system one way or the other. This
scenario is not likely to happen in a fully tested production environment, as it
would have auto-scaling and fail-over strategies in place.
The second benchmarking scenario is more believable and achievable
in a production-grade environment, where both meshes are subjected to
manageable load. In this scenario, Istio maintains an overall very good
response time, making QoS excellent for users. However, there are a few
samples where the response latencies are beyond acceptable limits, making
users starve for a page response for some requests. AWS App Mesh maintains
a consistent performance with a good response time, although it is higher than
Istio. Users overall see a steady response time with the AWS App Mesh, but
with Istio, they notice an even faster response time with except for some cases.
In the third benchmarking scenario, both meshes have very similar values
for the CPU and memory usage of the control plane, therefore, it is hard to
compare the control planes of both meshes for resource utilisation. For the
data plane, Istio data proxies consume fewer resources as compared to AWS
App Mesh data proxies. The tests need to be revised and re-performed for
the production-like environment to get more significant results. Although,
from the performed scenario and achieved result, we can say that both meshes
are good options in terms of resource utilization as there is no significant
difference in the resource consumption data points collected for both meshes.

66

Discussion

As mentioned in the earlier sections, AWS is the chosen cloud technology
for the implementation of both Istio and AWS App Mesh solutions. Istio is a
free and open-source service mesh, and it does not incur any costs to install it
on an existing distributed microservice architecture. However, the underlying
infrastructure supporting this architecture is provided by the cloud provider
and hence incurs some cost. AWS App Mesh is a service offered by AWS,
but it does not incur any additional cost [88]. The only price one needs to pay
is for the underlying resources utilized by AWS App Mesh. In both service
mesh implementations, EKS is used to provide the underlying architecture
with the same node configurations. EKS costs 0.10 USD per hour, resulting in
73 USD per month [89, 90]. An EC2 instance with instance type m5.8xlarge
costs 674.52 USD per month, making the total cost 747.52 USD per month.
In our performance test scenario, we maintain one EKS cluster, with one node
dedicated to AWS App Mesh and another to Istio Mesh. Therefore, the costs
remain the same for both Istio and AWS App Meshed application deployments
on an EKS cluster with one worker node. However, with AWS App Mesh,
the underlying architecture can be modified to support a different type of
deployment that is more cost-efficient. EKS supports two types of container
launch strategy, EC2 instances and Fargate-based launch [91]. In Fargate,
the pricing is calculated from the point of pulling a container image until
the termination of the EKS pod, with a minimum one-minute charge applied.
As there are no dedicated machines serving as worker nodes in the Fargate
solution, no additional costs arise apart from the actual resource utilization by
pods. According to the blog post, when workloads are dynamic and only up to
a certain threshold, the Fargate solution is more cost-effective regardless of the
AWS pricing plan (On Demand, Spot, and Savings)[92]. On the other hand,
EC2-launch becomes more cost-effective when workloads utilize the optimal
instance capacity.
In the thesis use-case, it can be observed that the workloads do not use more
than (Avg CPU utilization / Available CPU * 100 = 6/32*100 = 18.75%) 19%
CPU of the total available CPU for either Istio-meshed or AWS App Meshed
application. As a result, a Fargate-based implementation of this project is a
viable option. However, Istio does not support the EKS cluster with Fargate
implementation. It has been added to the Istio roadmap since January 2020,
although the support has not been added at the time of writing the thesis [93].
Istio and AWS App Mesh can be compared in terms of the monitoring
solutions that are built around these technologies. Istio provides an out-ofthe-box monitoring solution with Prometheus, Grafana, and Kiali tool stacks
for metrics collection, visualization, and traceability, respectively. As these

67

Discussion

are open-source tools, no additional cost is required for setting them up on
an Istio-enabled cluster. Although, for production-grade monitoring, the data
collected from the application needs to be backed up and stored securely. An
S3 bucket is a possible storage choice offered by AWS that can be integrated
with Istio using the open-source Thanos sidecar [94]. As per the AWS Thanos
solution blogpost, the basic components of Thanos ensure data backup and
data retrieval to and from S3 buckets, respectively [95]. In this monitoring
stack, the user only has to pay for data storage. On the other hand, AWS App
Mesh can be integrated with AWS managed Prometheus and Grafana services
for data collection and data visualization. Data storage, metric ingestion, and
data retrieval incur costs in these monitoring services. Apart from that, AWS
X-ray, which provides tracing capabilities for more visibility into applications,
also incurs costs for the number of traces recorded, scanned, and retrieved.
Istio solution being mostly open-source requires much less access cost,
whereas with AWS App Mesh, one has to pay for every involved service
on a usage basis. Unless the open source solution includes cloud-based
services such as S3 buckets and load balancers for data storage, an open source
solution can be significantly less expensive than an AWS solution.The costs for
accessing S3 buckets from open-source implementations can easily surpass
the costs of an AWS-supported solution. This can be seen from the sample
calculations mentioned in the appendix B. From these calculations, the istiobased solution might actually be costlier than the AWS App Meshed one.
However, it is important to do a more accurate calculation based on the actual
data requirements and expected loads of Infor’s production-grade application.
To
summarize,
Istio
comes
out
as
an
adequate
service mesh implementation as it provides faster response times as compared
to AWS App Mesh for high and manageable load situations in productiongrade environments. Resource utilization comparison for both meshes doesn’t
give a concrete outcome to pick one over the other. In terms of cost, Istio,
being an open-source technology, costs less than that of AWS App Mesh for
the monitoring solutions built around these technologies. Deployment efforts
are subjective and hence can be considered secondary when choosing one
technology over the other. For all these reasons, Istio is a better-suited solution
than AWS App Mesh for production-grade environments at Infor.

68

Conclusions and Future work

Chapter 6
Conclusions and Future work
6.1

Conclusions

The Thesis project explores into service mesh technology in depth, discussing
its architecture and common feature-set. It also takes a deep dive into Istio
and AWS App Mesh technologies and compares the two for response latency,
throughput, resource utilization, deployment efforts for canary deployment
feature, and costs concerning the monitoring solution built around these
meshes.
The research mainly explores different scenarios for performance testing of
a deployed application. Similar scenarios can be reused for other applications
deployed with other service meshes with none or several feature sets. In terms
of deployment efforts and performance, Istio stands out by a considerable
margin. The production-grade environment is expected to be subjected
to a manageable load at most times, where Istio is expected to achieve
better response time than AWS App Mesh. Both Istio and AWS App Mesh
utilize similar levels of resources. Therefore, resource utilization cannot be
considered an influencing factor for the decision of service mesh selection.
The project gives insights into how service mesh technologies work as well
as their importance. Service mesh gives more visibility into an application and
strengthens the observability to improve monitoring and traceability. It also
gives an idea of how comparative analysis works and how to design different
scenarios to conduct performance testing of the application.
The thesis project helped to decide which solution is the most suitable
to manage production-grade application deployments in Infor’s infrastructure.

69

Conclusions and Future work

As mentioned earlier, Infor’s infrastructure is highly dependent on the AWS
cloud provider. However, in the future, if Infor decides to explore other cloud
providers such as GCP or Azure, it is important to reiterate over the selection
process of service mesh implementation.

6.2

Limitations

The project gives a service mesh implementation to pursue further, although
the feature set required by the application is not fully evolved at the time of
implementation. Therefore, canary deployment is the only feature enabled in
the meshes while conducting the testing scenarios. With a complete feature
set, the performance results may differ for both meshes. Secondly, cost
implications need to be further verified with respect to the actual productiongrade environment, as the testing environment cannot replicate the request
load received in the production environment. Thirdly, autoscaling of both
nodes and containers can affect the application performance as well as resource
utilization. This project does not explore the impacts of autoscaling on
performance. Therefore, it would be an interesting aspect to explore. The
results achieved from this thesis are only limited to the selected application,
deployment infrastructure, and chosen feature-set of service mesh. It cannot be
directly extrapolated to other applications with extra feature-set requirements.

6.3

Future work

Due to the time constraint and the scope limitation of the thesis
project, observability and traceability were not explored in-depth during
the implementation. The project’s future scope may include comparing
service meshes to understand their benefits and limitations in terms of
observability. This could explore different open-source and cloud-specific
monitoring solutions. Furthermore, developers or development operations
engineers can be interviewed to understand the necessary feature-set for
application deployment and the required metrics for efficient monitoring of the
application. The same scenarios designed in the project can be extrapolated
and tested with a production-ready application to get more accurate results.
In the thesis project, Fortio is used as the benchmarking tool. However, other
tools such as locust, JMeter, etc. that can also be further explored to understand
their advantages and limitations in the designed scenarios. It might be possible

70

Conclusions and Future work

to achieve more data dimensions or implement different scenarios that may not
be plausible with Fortio. Cost analysis can be conducted in a more detailed
manner after implementing a production-grade environment to understand the
actual cost impacts of service mesh in production.

6.4

Reflections

The project work is important to Infor because it helps the company
decide which type of service mesh to investigate further for productiongrade environments. Service mesh, being a novel technology, lacks detailed
comparative research. This research sets a strong foundation to help
researchers understand the importance of service mesh and it proposes a
process of selecting the right solution. The research attempts to select a
technology that utilizes fewer resources, thereby reducing the cost of the
implemented solution and consuming less energy.

71

Conclusions and Future work

72

REFERENCES

References
[1] C. Richardson, “What are microservices?” 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://microservices.io/
[2] A. Khatri and V. Khatri, Mastering Service Mesh: Enhance, secure, and
observe cloud-native applications with Istio, Linkerd, and Consul. Packt
Publishing Ltd, 2020.
[3] Mirantis,
“Comparison
of
current
service
mesh
architectures.” [Online]. Available: https://www.slideshare.net/mirantis/
comparison-of-current-service-mesh-architectures
[4] Service mesh: Architecture, concepts, and top 4 frameworks.
[Online]. Available: https://www.aquasec.com/cloud-native-academy/
container-security/service-mesh/
[5] L. Calcote and Z. Butcher, Istio: Up and running: Using a service mesh
to connect, secure, control, and observe. O’Reilly Media, 2019.
[6] Istio.io. Architecture. [Online]. Available: https://istio.io/latest/docs/
ops/deployment/architecture/
[7] Review: AWS app mesh – a service mesh for EC2, ECS,
and EKS | cloudonaut. [Online]. Available: https://cloudonaut.io/
review-aws-app-mesh-service-mesh-ec2-ecs-eks/
[8] AWS
app
mesh
application-level
networking
for
all your services - amazon web services. [Online].
Available: https://aws.amazon.com/app-mesh/?aws-app-mesh-blogs.
sort-by=item.additionalFields.createdDate&aws-app-mesh-blogs.
sort-order=desc&whats-new-cards.sort-by=item.additionalFields.
postDateTime&whats-new-cards.sort-order=desc

73

REFERENCES

[9] Istio.io. Bookinfo application. [Online]. Available: https://istio.io/latest/
docs/examples/bookinfo/
[10] Managing
your
EKS
traffic
with
app
mesh
|
by
arjen
schwarz
|
DigIO
australia
|
medium.
[Online].
Available:
https://medium.com/digio-australia/
managing-your-eks-traffic-with-app-mesh-a8838e27e7a1
[11] L. Larsson. Benchmarking istio 1.5.0 and linkerd 2.7.1 (master
thesis) - elastisys. [Online]. Available:
https://elastisys.com/
benchmarking-istio-linkerd-erik-dahlberg-master-thesis/
[12] M.
Kipper.
Benchmarking
istio
&
linkerd
CPU.
[Online].
Available:
https://medium.com/@michael_87395/
benchmarking-istio-linkerd-cpu-c36287e32781
[13] T. Fromm. (2019, May) Kinvolk: Performance benchmark analysis of
istio and linkerd. [Online]. Available: https://kinvolk.io/blog/2019/05/
performance-benchmark-analysis-of-istio-and-linkerd/
[14] L.
De
Lauretis,
“From
monolithic
architecture to microservices architecture,” in 2019 IEEE International
Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering Workshops (ISSREW),
2019. doi: 10.1109/ISSREW.2019.00050 pp. 93–96.
[15] N. Lei, E. Masanet, and J. Koomey, “Best practices for analyzing the
direct energy use of blockchain technology systems: Review and policy
recommendations,” Energy Policy, vol. 156, p. 112422, 09 2021. doi:
10.1016/j.enpol.2021.112422
[16] “Azure
sustainability-sustainable
technologies:
Microsoft
azure.” [Online]. Available:
https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/
global-infrastructure/sustainability/#overview
[17] “Awsenergy,” 1979. [Online]. Available:
energy/sustainability/

https://aws.amazon.com/

[18] “Microservices pattern: Monolithic architecture pattern,” 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://microservices.io/patterns/monolithic.html
[19] R. Awati and I. Wigmore, “What is monolithic architecture in
software?” May 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.techtarget.com/
whatis/definition/monolithic-architecture

74

REFERENCES

[20] S. Newman, Monolith to microservices: evolutionary patterns to
transform your monolith. O’Reilly Media, 2019.
[21] A. Tsikhanovich, “Monolithic vs. microservices. a quick guide,”
Jul 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://www.qulix.com/about/
monolithic-vs-microservices-architechture/
[22] C. Bird, N. Nagappan, B. Murphy, H. Gall, and P. Devanbu, “Don’t touch
my code! examining the effects of ownership on software quality,” 09
2011. doi: 10.1145/2025113.2025119 pp. 4–14.
[23] R. Posa, Scala Reactive Programming: Build scalable, functional
reactive microservices with Akka, Play, and Lagom.
Packt
Publishing, 2018. ISBN 9781787282872. [Online]. Available:
https://books.google.co.in/books?id=VutODwAAQBAJ
[24] P.
Jausovec,
“Fallacies
of
distributed
systems,”
Nov
2020. [Online]. Available: https://blogs.oracle.com/developers/post/
fallacies-of-distributed-systems
[25] A. Kharenko, “Monolithic vs. microservices architecture,” Apr
2018. [Online]. Available:
https://articles.microservices.com/
monolithic-vs-microservices-architecture-5c4848858f59
[26] Q. Zhang, L. Cheng, and R. Boutaba, “Cloud computing: Stateof-the-art and research challenges,” Journal of Internet Services and
Applications, vol. 1, no. 1, p. 7–18, 2010. doi: 10.1007/s13174-0100007-6
[27] M. Portnoy, Virtualization essentials. John Wiley & Sons, 2012, vol. 19.
[28] G. Sayfan, Mastering Kubernetes: Master the art of container
management by using the power of Kubernetes. Packt Publishing Ltd,
2018.
[29] NetApp, “What are containers?
– benefits and use
cases.” [Online]. Available: https://www.netapp.com/devops-solutions/
what-are-containers/
[30] S. Baškarada, V. Nguyen, and A. Koronios, “Architecting
microservices: Practical opportunities and challenges,” Journal
of Computer Information Systems, vol. 60, no. 5, pp. 428–436,

75

REFERENCES

2020. doi: 10.1080/08874417.2018.1520056. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1080/08874417.2018.1520056
[31] J. Turnbull, The Docker Book: Containerization is the new
virtualization. James Turnbull, 2014.
[32] D. Bernstein, “Containers and cloud: From lxc to docker to kubernetes,”
IEEE Cloud Computing, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 81–84, 2014. doi:
10.1109/MCC.2014.51
[33] “Container and virtualization tools.” [Online]. Available:
//linuxcontainers.org/

https:

[34] G.
Gupta,
“Need
of
container
orchestration,”
Sep
2019. [Online]. Available: https://gauravguptacloud.medium.com/
need-of-container-orchestration-a9f5dfbee0e3
[35] B. Burns, B. Grant, D. Oppenheimer, E. Brewer, and J. Wilkes,
“Borg, omega, and kubernetes: Lessons learned from three containermanagement systems over a decade,” Queue, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 70–93,
2016.
[36] “Options for highly available topology,” Jan 2022. [Online].
Available: https://kubernetes.io/docs/setup/production-environment/
tools/kubeadm/ha-topology/
[37] J. Ghofrani and D. Lübke, “Challenges of microservices architecture: A
survey on the state of the practice.” ZEUS, vol. 2018, pp. 1–8, 2018.
[38] Challenges of microservices & when to avoid them – BMC
software | blogs. [Online]. Available: https://www.bmc.com/blogs/
microservices-challenges-when-to-avoid/#
[39] W. Li, Y. Lemieux, J. Gao, Z. Zhao, and Y. Han, “Service mesh:
Challenges, state of the art, and future research opportunities,” in 2019
IEEE International Conference on Service-Oriented System Engineering
(SOSE), 2019. doi: 10.1109/SOSE.2019.00026 pp. 122–1225.
[40] B. Sutter and C. Posta, Introducing Istio Service Mesh for Microservices.
O’Reilly Media, Incorporated, 2019.
[41] R. Sharma and A. Singh, Getting Started with Istio Service Mesh:
Manage Microservices in Kubernetes. Apress, 2020.

76

REFERENCES

[42] “Fallacies of distributed computing,” Jul 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fallacies_of_distributed_computing
[43] R. Chandramouli, Z. Butcher et al., “Building secure microservicesbased applications using service-mesh architecture,” NIST Special
Publication, vol. 800, p. 204A, 2020.
[44] O. Sheikh, S. Dikaleh, D. Mistry, D. Pape, and C. Felix, “Modernize
digital applications with microservices management using the istio
service mesh,” in Proceedings of the 28th Annual International
Conference on Computer Science and Software Engineering, ser.
CASCON ’18. USA: IBM Corp., 2018, p. 359–360.
[45] What’s a service mesh?
and why do i need
one?
[Online]. Available:
https://linkerd.io/2017/04/25/
whats-a-service-mesh-and-why-do-i-need-one/
[46] (99+) christian posta | LinkedIn. [Online]. Available:
//www.linkedin.com/in/ceposta/

https:

[47] Finagle. [Online]. Available: https://twitter.github.io/finagle/
[48] Netflix/hystrix: Hystrix is a latency and fault tolerance library designed
to isolate points of access to remote systems, services and 3rd party
libraries, stop cascading failure and enable resilience in complex
distributed systems where failure is inevitable. [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/Netflix/Hystrix
[49] Comparing
service
mesh
architectures
DZone
microservices. [Online]. Available:
https://dzone.com/articles/
comparing-service-mesh-architectures
[50] Managing
microservices
with
kubernetes
and
istio
|
by
róża
pniewska
|
kreuzwerker
GmbH
|
medium.
[Online].
Available:
https://medium.com/kreuzwerker-gmbh/
managing-microservices-with-kubernetes-and-istio-76efea547b28
[51] Open Infrastructure Foundation, “Comparing service mesh
architectures.” [Online]. Available: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
cWfACBIp0a8
[52] Service mesh ultimate guide 2020: Managing service-to-service
communications. [Online]. Available: https://www.infoq.com/articles/
service-mesh-ultimate-guide/

77

REFERENCES

[53] B. Doerrfeld. 9 open-source service meshes compared.
[Online].
Available:
https://techbeacon.com/app-dev-testing/
9-open-source-service-meshes-compared
[54] servicemesh.es. [Online]. Available: https://servicemesh.es/
[55] AWS fault injection simulator FAQs | fully-managed fault
injection service | amazon web services. [Online]. Available:
https://aws.amazon.com/fis/faqs/
[56] AWS re:invent 2016: Automating cloud management & deployment
(DEV319) - YouTube. [Online]. Available: https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=Epx_32c3c6s
[57] K8s service mesh: Linkerd or istio | by ohad senior | CloudZone
| medium. [Online]. Available:
https://medium.com/cloudzone/
k8s-service-mesh-linkerd-or-istio-4bb650d51bc6
[58] Istio. [Online]. Available: https://istio.io/latest/
[59] Istio demo: "what’s new and exciting in istio 1.8?" - YouTube. [Online].
Available: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pPZNfZLPcZI
[60] Meshery.
[Online].
https://layer5.io/cloud-native-management/meshery

Available:

[61] Gloo mesh enterprise :: Gloo mesh enterprise docs. [Online]. Available:
https://docs.solo.io/gloo-mesh-enterprise/latest/
[62] L. Sun and D. Berg, “Istio explained.” [Online]. Available:
https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/istio-explained/9781492073963/
[63] K. James. (2017, May) Istio: An open microservice mesh for the cloudnative era - wikibon research. [Online]. Available: https://wikibon.com/
istio-an-open-microservice-mesh-for-the-cloud-native-era/
[64] Traffic management. [Online]. Available: https://istio.io/latest/docs/
concepts/traffic-management/
[65] What is AWS app mesh?
- AWS app mesh. [Online].
Available:
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/app-mesh/latest/userguide/
what-is-app-mesh.html

78

REFERENCES

[66] Deep.
(2020,
Dec)
Microservices
and
AWS
app
mesh.
[Online].
Available:
https://medium.com/swlh/
microservices-and-aws-app-mesh-f4c7cab9ddca
[67] Getting started with AWS app mesh and kubernetes - AWS app
mesh. [Online]. Available: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/app-mesh/
latest/userguide/getting-started-kubernetes.html
[68] AWS app mesh controller. [Online]. Available: https://aws.github.io/
aws-app-mesh-controller-for-k8s/
[69] AWS app mesh features - amazon web services. [Online]. Available:
https://aws.amazon.com/app-mesh/features/
[70] R. Alvarez-Parmar and B. Emer. (2020, July) Getting started with
AWS app mesh and amazon EKS | containers. Section: Amazon
Elastic Kubernetes Service. [Online]. Available: https://aws.amazon.
com/blogs/containers/getting-started-with-app-mesh-and-eks/
[71] Private certificate authority - AWS certificate manager - amazon
web services (AWS). [Online]. Available: https://aws.amazon.com/
certificate-manager/private-certificate-authority/
[72] Benchmarking linkerd and istio. [Online]. Available:
//linkerd.io/2021/05/27/linkerd-vs-istio-benchmarks/

https:

[73] AWS app mesh vs. istio:
A comparison of service mesh
- vedcraft. [Online]. Available: https://vedcraft.com/architecture/
aws-appmesh-vs-istio-comparison-of-service-mesh/
[74] AWS
app
mesh
vs
google
istio
service
mesh
bizety. [Online]. Available:
https://www.bizety.com/2019/01/04/
aws-app-mesh-vs-google-istio-service-mesh/
[75] AWS app mesh vs istio | what are the differences? [Online]. Available:
https://stackshare.io/stackups/aws-app-mesh-vs-istio
[76] Understand qps,
tps,
pv,
uv,
gmv,
ip,
rps in
seconds.
[Online].
Available:
https://blog.karatos.in/a?ID=
01800-f3813c82-9787-400c-b5ae-adadd7885bb7
[77] . M. Read. Installation configuration profiles. [Online]. Available:
https://istio.io/latest/docs/setup/additional-setup/config-profiles/

79

REFERENCES

[78] Kinvolk, “Kinvolk service mesh benchmark suite,” original-date: 201905-18T14:00:42Z. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/kinvolk/
service-mesh-benchmark
[79] I. Sim, “Linkerd2 benchmark,” original-date: 2018-11-15T05:08:53Z.
[Online]. Available: https://github.com/ihcsim/linkerd2-benchmark/
blob/master/gke.sh
[80] What is time to first byte, and how to improve it.
[Online]. Available:
https://www.searchenginepeople.com/blog/
16081-time-to-first-byte-seo.html
[81] T. Gupta. Load testing with locust. [Online]. Available:
//medium.com/swlh/load-testing-with-locust-3e74349f9cbf

https:

[82] Best server and application response time monitoring tools +
guide - DNSstuff. [Online]. Available: https://www.dnsstuff.com/
response-time-monitoring
[83] When to use canary vs. blue/green vs. rolling deployment.
[Online]. Available: https://www.techtarget.com/searchitoperations/
answer/When-to-use-canary-vs-blue-green-vs-rolling-deployment
[84] A. Joshi. asawari44/IstioVSAppMeshBenchmark: This repository
contains code for application deployment and benchmarking for both
istio and AppMesh. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/asawari44/
IstioVSAppMeshBenchmark
[85] Istio, “Istio/samples/bookinfo at master · istio/istio.” [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/istio/istio/tree/master/samples/bookinfo
[86] Integrating AWS x-ray with AWS app mesh | AWS compute
blog. [Online]. Available: https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/compute/
integrating-aws-x-ray-with-aws-app-mesh/
[87] FAQ · fortio/fortio wiki. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/fortio/
fortio
[88] AWS app mesh pricing - amazon web services. [Online]. Available:
https://aws.amazon.com/app-mesh/pricing/
[89] Amazon EKS pricing | managed kubernetes service | amazon web
services. [Online]. Available: https://aws.amazon.com/eks/pricing/

80

REFERENCES

[90] AWS pricing calculator. [Online]. Available: https://calculator.aws/#/
estimate
[91] Theoretical cost optimization by amazon ECS launch
type:
Fargate
vs
EC2
|
containers.
[Online].
Available:
https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/containers/
theoretical-cost-optimization-by-amazon-ecs-launch-type-fargate-vs-ec2/
[92] Theoretical cost optimization by amazon ECS launch type:
Fargate vs EC2 | containers. Section:
Amazon EC2.
[Online]. Available:
https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/containers/
theoretical-cost-optimization-by-amazon-ecs-launch-type-fargate-vs-ec2/
[93] [EKS/fargate] :
Support for ISTIO service mesh sidecars ·
issue #682 · aws/containers-roadmap. [Online]. Available: https:
//github.com/aws/containers-roadmap/issues/682
[94] Improving HA and long-term storage for prometheus using thanos
on EKS with s3 | AWS open source blog. Section: Advanced
(300). [Online]. Available: https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/opensource/
improving-ha-and-long-term-storage-for-prometheus-using-thanos-on-eks-with-s3/
[95] Improving HA and long-term storage for prometheus using thanos
on EKS with s3 | AWS open source blog. Section: Advanced
(300). [Online]. Available: https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/opensource/
improving-ha-and-long-term-storage-for-prometheus-using-thanos-on-eks-with-s3/
[96] Aeschylus and M. L. West, “Prometheus,” 1992. [Online]. Available:
https://aws.amazon.com/prometheus/pricing/
[97] Kiali architecture. [Online]. Available: https://kiali.io/docs/architecture/
architecture/

81

REFERENCES

82

Appendix A: Selection criteria

Appendix A
Selection criteria
A discussion about service mesh implementation with a development team at
Infor brought up the following points:
1. What technology stack is currently being used in your application
architecture?
We are currently using AWS to deploy our microservices on the
Elastic Kubernetes Service (EKS) cluster that takes care of container
orchestration using Kubernetes. Microservices are deployed with
the help of a Continuous Integration/Continuous deployment (CI/CD)
pipeline, implemented on GitLab with the help of helm charts.
Microservices running inside the cluster are exposed in the Virtual
Private Cloud (VPC) with Network LoadBalancer (NLB). We also use
Sumologic and Grafana with a telegraph agent for visibility into the
application stack.
2. What problems will be solved with the introduction of a service
mesh to your architecture?
Currently, authentication to the service stack is completely managed by
the customer-facing microservice. The end-user is required to pass a
Java Web Token (JWT) authentication token in the request to access
the service through the API gateway. This API gateway communicates
with a lambda function to check the validity of the token, if the token
is valid, the request gets through and the user receives a response.
We do not have any way to control inter-service communication. All
services are accessible from all other services. Authentication and
authorization can be handled more maturely with the help of service

83

Appendix A: Selection criteria

mesh. Secondly, despite having some monitoring in place, it is difficult
to get more fine-grained data about microservices such as success rate,
request latency, request rate, etc. Canary and Blue-green deployments
are part of a roadmap for application deployment production. With
the help of service mesh, both observability and routing goals can be
achieved as per the service mesh feature set mentioned above. Currently,
developers implement retry and timeout logic per microservice to ensure
reliability. A service mesh provides a more sophisticated solution such
as circuit breaking and rate-limiting to achieve reliability.
3. Is your team ready for this technological shift?
The common opinion is to adopt service mesh as it provides solutions to
existing problems and introduces more features. There are other teams
in the organization exploring the idea of using a service mesh.
4. What are the requirements or cross-cutting concerns of your
application?
Observability, trust, routing, and resilience are the topmost priorities
for the application.

84

Appendix B: Sample cost calculations for service mesh solutions

Appendix B
Sample cost calculations for
service mesh solutions
The following values are based on an example of cost analysis mentioned on
AWS official documentation [96].
Assumed parameters
• Data size : 3.34 GB
• Total samples ingested : 892.8 million samples (explained in [96])
• Total Requests made to view dashboard per month: 72000
• Queries sampled per month : 7.2 billion processed queries (This is
calculated from the following assumed values, explained in [96]).
– End users : 1
– Charts : 20
– Dashboard viewing time : 2 hours
Solution 1 - Istio-based
- Prometheus : Open-source
- Metric collection : free
- Thanos : No additional network cost if data is traversed in the s3 object store
and thanos working in the same aws region
Only object storage and retrieval cost , shall be discussed in s3.
- Grafana : Open-source
- S3 :

85

Appendix B: Sample cost calculations for service mesh solutions

• Storage : 0.07682 USD (0.023 USD per GB * 3.34)
• Request and data retrieval: 0.360 USD (72000/1000 * 0.005 USD per
1000 requests)
• kiali - no extra storage needed for kiali. It uses grafana or cluster api or
jaeger or prometheus data to retrieve trace info [97]
• Total = around 0.4 USD
Solution 2: AppMesh
- Managed prometheus + managed grafana
• Storage: 0.10 USD (0.03 USD per GB * 3.34 GB)
• Metric ingestion: 80.93 USD ( 0.90 per 10M samples * 892.8 million
samples)
• Request and data retrieval: $0.72 ($0.10/billion samples processed * 7.2
billion samples processed)
• Total = 81.75 USD
- AWS X-ray service : Free for first 100000 requests

86

Appendix C: Listings

Appendix C
Listings

87

Appendix C: Listings

--apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: DestinationRule
metadata:
name: reviews
spec:
host: reviews
trafficPolicy:
loadBalancer:
simple: ROUND_ROBIN
subsets:
- name: v1
labels:
version: v1
- name: v2
labels:
version: v2
- name: v3
labels:
version: v3
Listing 1: DestinationRule - first approach

88

Appendix C: Listings

--apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: VirtualService
metadata:
name: reviews
spec:
hosts:
- reviews
http:
- route:
- destination:
host: reviews
subset: v1
weight: 33
- destination:
host: reviews
subset: v2
weight: 33
- destination:
host: reviews
subset: v3
weight: 34
--apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: DestinationRule
metadata:
name: reviews
spec:
host: reviews
subsets:
- name: v1
labels:
version: v1
- name: v2
labels:
version: v2
- name: v3
labels:
version: v3
Listing 2: DestinationRule - second approach

89

Appendix C: Listings

apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: Gateway
metadata:
name: bookinfo-gateway
spec:
selector:
istio: ingressgateway # use istio default controller
servers:
- port:
number: 80
name: http
protocol: HTTP
hosts:
- "*"
--apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: VirtualService
metadata:
name: bookinfo
spec:
hosts:
- "*"
gateways:
- bookinfo-gateway
http:
- match:
- uri:
exact: /productpage
- uri:
prefix: /static
- uri:
exact: /login
- uri:
exact: /logout
- uri:
prefix: /api/v1/products
route:
- destination:
host: productpage
port:
number: 9080

Listing 3: Istio Ingress Gateway
90

Appendix C: Listings

--apiVersion: appmesh.k8s.aws/v1beta2
kind: Mesh
metadata:
name: appmesh-bookinfo
spec:
namespaceSelector:
matchLabels:
mesh: appmesh-bookinfo
Listing 4: AWS App Mesh creation

--apiVersion: appmesh.k8s.aws/v1beta2
kind: VirtualNode
metadata:
name: reviews
namespace: appmesh-bookinfo
spec:
podSelector:
matchLabels:
app: reviews
listeners:
- portMapping:
port: 9080
protocol: http
serviceDiscovery:
dns:
hostname: reviews.appmesh-bookinfo.svc.cluster.local
Listing 5: VirtualNode for service reviews

91

Appendix C: Listings

--apiVersion: appmesh.k8s.aws/v1beta2
kind: VirtualNode
metadata:
name: reviews-v2
namespace: appmesh-bookinfo
spec:
podSelector:
matchLabels:
app: reviews-v2
listeners:
- portMapping:
port: 9080
protocol: http
serviceDiscovery:
dns:
hostname: reviews-v2.appmesh-bookinfo.svc.cluster.local
backends:
- virtualService:
virtualServiceRef:
name: ratings
Listing 6: VirtualNode for service reviews-v2

92

Appendix C: Listings

--apiVersion: appmesh.k8s.aws/v1beta2
kind: VirtualNode
metadata:
name: reviews-v3
namespace: appmesh-bookinfo
spec:
podSelector:
matchLabels:
app: reviews-v3
listeners:
- portMapping:
port: 9080
protocol: http
serviceDiscovery:
dns:
hostname: reviews-v3.appmesh-bookinfo.svc.cluster.local
backends:
- virtualService:
virtualServiceRef:
name: ratings

Listing 7: VirtualNode for service reviews v3
--apiVersion: appmesh.k8s.aws/v1beta2
kind: VirtualService
metadata:
name: reviews
namespace: appmesh-bookinfo
spec:
awsName: reviews
provider:
virtualRouter:
virtualRouterRef:
name: reviews-virtual-router

Listing 8: VirtualService for service reviews

93

Appendix C: Listings

--apiVersion: appmesh.k8s.aws/v1beta2
kind: VirtualRouter
metadata:
namespace: appmesh-bookinfo
name: reviews-virtual-router
spec:
listeners:
- port mapping:
port: 9080
protocol: http
routes:
- name: reviews-route
httpRoute:
match:
prefix: /
action:
weightedTargets:
- virtualNodeRef:
name: reviews
weight: 1
- virtualNodeRef:
name: reviews-v2
weight: 1
- virtualNodeRef:
name: reviews-v3
weight: 1

Listing 9: VirtualRouter for service reviews

94

Appendix C: Listings

--apiVersion: appmesh.k8s.aws/v1beta2
kind: VirtualGateway
metadata:
name: ingress-gw
namespace: appmesh-bookinfo
spec:
namespaceSelector:
matchLabels:
gateway: ingress-gw
gatewayRouteSelector:
matchLabels:
gateway: ingress-gw
podSelector:
matchLabels:
app: ingress-gw
listeners:
- portMapping:
port: 8088
protocol: http
logging:
accessLog:
file:
path: /dev/stdout
Listing 10: Virtualgateway for AWS App Mesh ingress gateway

95

Appendix C: Listings

--apiVersion: appmesh.k8s.aws/v1beta2
kind: GatewayRoute
metadata:
name: ingress-gw
namespace: appmesh-bookinfo
spec:
httpRoute:
match:
prefix: "/"
action:
target:
virtualService:
virtualServiceRef:
name: productpage
Listing 11: gateway route to reach service productpage

--apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
name: ingress-gw
namespace: appmesh-bookinfo
annotations:
service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-type: "nlb"
spec:
type: LoadBalancer
ports:
- port: 80
targetPort: 8088
name: http
selector:
app: ingress-gw
Listing 12: Service of type loadbalancer exposing ingress gateway

96

Appendix C: Listings

--apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
name: ingress-gw
namespace: appmesh-bookinfo
spec:
replicas: 1
selector:
matchLabels:
app: ingress-gw
template:
metadata:
labels:
app: ingress-gw
spec:
serviceAccountName: appmesh-bookinfo
securityContext:
fsGroup: 65534
containers:
- name: envoy
image: 840364872350.dkr.ecr.us-west-2.amazonaws.com
/aws-appmesh-envoy:v1.17.2.0
ports:
- containerPort: 8088

Listing 13: AWS App Mesh ingress gateway deployment

97

Appendix C: Listings

!#/bin/sh
QPS= 0
connections=220
time=30s
url="<INGRESS_GATEWAY_FOR_ISTIO_OR_AWS_APPMESH>/productpage"
filename_prefix="test"
for i in {1..30}
do
kubectl exec <fortio_pod_id> -n fortio -- fortio load
-QPS $QPS -c $connections -t $time -json
${filename_prefix}_${i}.json -a $url
sleep 5
done
Listing 14: Bash shell Script to calculate the maximum QPS

98

Appendix C: Listings

import requests
def get_QPS(file_prefix):
for i in range(1,31):
url = "<FORTIO_URL>/fortio/data/"
+file_prefix+"_"+str(i)+".json"
r= requests.get(url)
json_data = r.json()
print(str(int(json_data["ActualQPS"]*1000/1000)))
def get_latency(index, file_prefix):
for i in range(1,31):
url = "<FORTIO_URL>/fortio/data/"
+file_prefix+"_"+str(i)+".json"
r= requests.get(url)
json_data = r.json()
print(str(int(json_data
["DurationHistogram"]["Percentiles"]
[index]["Value"]*1000)))
def get_data():
file_prefix="test"
print("QPS")
get_QPS()
print("p50")
get_latency(0, file_prefix="test")
print("p75")
get_latency(1, file_prefix="test")
print("p90")
get_latency(2, file_prefix="test")
print("p99")
get_latency(3, file_prefix="test")
print("p99.9")
get_latency(4, file_prefix="test")
get_data()
Listing 15: Script to format collected data

99

Appendix C: Listings

100

TRITA-EECS-EX-2022:907
www.kth.se

